Jaguar Land Rover has announced new technology that uses Vehicle-to-Infrastructure (V2X) to connects cars to traffic lights. The car-maker said that the technology can help drivers avoid getting stuck at red and help free up traffic flow in cities. The Green Light Optimal Speed Advisory (GLOSA) system allows cars to ‘talk’ to traffic lights and informs the driver of the speed they should be driving as they approach junctions or signals. Widespread adoption of the V2X technology will prevent drivers from racing to beat the lights and improve air quality by reducing harsh acceleration or braking near lights, Jaguar Land Rover said. The goal is for the V2X revolution to create free-flowing cities with fewer delays and less commuter stress. The connected technology is currently being trialled on a Jaguar F-PACE, as part of a £20 million (R371 million) collaborative research project. Jaguar Land Rover said that connected technology trials are enhancing existing Advanced Driver Assistance (ADAS) features by increasing the line of sight of a vehicle when it is connected via the internet to other vehicles and infrastructure. For example, Intersection Collision Warning (ICW) alerts drivers when it is unsafe to proceed at a junction. ICW informs drivers if other cars are approaching from another road and can suggest the order in which cars should proceed at a junction. Jaguar Land Rover has also addressed time lost to searching for a parking space by providing real-time information of available spaces to drivers and developed an Emergency Vehicle Warning to alert motorists when a fire engine, police car or ambulance is approaching. The advanced technology builds on the connected systems already available on the Jaguar F-PACE such as Adaptive Cruise Control. “This cutting-edge technology will radically reduce the time we waste at traffic lights, said Oriol Quintana-Morales, Jaguar Land Rover Connected Technology research engineer. “It has the potential to revolutionise driving by creating safe, free-flowing cities that take the stress out of commuting. Our research is motivated by the chance to make future journeys as comfortable and stress-free as possible for all our customers.” Read: 5 major new traffic laws that every South African needs to know about