The new Mercedes-AMG G 63 is now available in South Africa, and has undergone the greatest change in its history, the group says. The new G 63 includes a newly developed AMG RIDE CONTROL suspension, AMG-specific transmission modes and a new interior with optimal widescreen cockpit. The AMG is powered by a 430 kW 4.0-litre V8 biturbo engine, while reinterpretation of the design creates strong highlights with the AMG-specific radiator grille, flared wheel arches, striking side pipes on the exhaust system and the 20-inch wheels — which come as standard. “The new Mercedes-AMG G 63 inherits the positively powerful DNA of its ancestors. Among the genes are its characteristic design and unparalleled off-roading capabilities. We only modified that which would strengthen its predecessor and make its uniqueness even more pronounced. “In short, the new G 63 is still a ‘G’ — only better — which is was our customers want,”” said Johannes Fritz, co-CEO of Mercedes-Benz South Africa and executive director of Mercedes-Benz Cars. The AMG 4.0-litre V8 biturbo engine now also replaces the previous 5.5-litre V8 biturbo engine in the Mercedes-AMG G 63. It generates 430 kW in this model, and delivers a maximum torque of 850 Nm. This is available across a wide rev range between 2,500 and 3,500 rpm – going from zero to 100 km/h in 4.5 seconds. This performance is maintained up to the limited maximum speed of 220 km/h (or 240 km/h with the AMG Driver’s package). The two turbochargers are not positioned on the outside of the cylinder banks, but inside the cylinder “V”. Advantages include a compact engine design, spontaneous response of the turbochargers, and low exhaust emissions due to the optimal airflow to the near-engine catalysts, Mercedes said. The eight-cylinder delivers its power with muscular torque in all engine speed ranges and achieves maximum efficiency for low fuel consumption and emission figures. For more efficiency, Mercedes-AMG has equipped the V8 engine in the G 63 with the AMG Cylinder Management cylinder deactivation system. In the partial-load range, cylinders two, three, five and eight are deactivated, which significantly lowers the fuel consumption. The combined fuel consumption is 13.1 l/100 km, and the combined CO2 emissions is 299 g/km. When the driver has selected the “Comfort” transmission driving mode, the cylinder deactivation system is available in the wide engine speed range from 1,000 to 3,250 rpm. The standard-specification AMG Performance 4MATIC all-wheel drive features rear-biased torque distribution with a front/rear split of 40 to 60 percent. This configuration ensures greater agility on the road and improved traction during acceleration. In the preceding model the distribution was still a neutral 50:50. Customers have a choice of eleven new exterior paint finishes (e.g. brilliant blue or designo mystic white bright). In total, 24 paint colours are now available, of which nine are metallic and 13 are designo. Safety As standard equipment, Active Lane Keeping Assist with two intensity settings, uses one-sided braking action to prevent the vehicle from unintentionally leaving its lane – for example when inadvertently crossing uninterrupted lane markings. The system uses a camera to recognise when the driver is crossing a lane marking. Steering wheel vibrations alert the driver to the situation. If the driver fails to react, the G-Class is braked on one side to return it to its lane. Image recognition and information from the digital road map in the navigation system allow the permitted maximum speed and any restrictions on overtaking for the current route section to be computed and shown in the instrument cluster. Additional restrictions such as speed limits in wet conditions (warning when the windscreen wipers are switched on) or speed limits only for trucks are also taken into account. Traffic Sign Assist is also able to recognise no-entry signs and warn the driver to check the direction of travel. The passive safety of the new G-Class is based on a new body design with a particularly rigid passenger cell, the ladder-type frame and specifically deformable crumple zones. In a frontal crash, the ladder-type frame uses a special support to direct longitudinal forces into the floor structure. The extra-rigid passenger cell gives the occupants sufficient protective space. It also reduces the deceleration forces acting on the occupants in an accident. Regarding new standard safety equipement, the new G-Class comes with two additional airbags in the A pillars, and a kneebag. Interior design The new G 63 has been given a completely newly designed, modern interior that echoes specific exterior features. The shape of the round headlamps is reflected in the side air vents, and that of the indicators in the tweeters on the dashboard. Hallmarks of the G 63 also include the grab handle in front of the front passenger and the chrome-highlighted switches for the three differential locks. The new fully digital 12.3 inch Widescreen Cockpit comes as standard for the first time in the new G-Class allowing the driver to have three different display styles. The new dimensional concept in the interior benefits all the occupants. The increase in length (+101 millimetres), width (+121 millimetres) and height (+40 millimetres) provides the basis for a significantly more airy and spacious impression than in the previous model. The rear seats can be folded down in a ratio of 40, 60 or 100%. The seats in the G-Class are equipped as standard with numerous convenience functions and are ergonomically designed, thus providing enhanced seating comfort and lateral support. Features include the Memory function for the driver’s seat, seat heating front and rear, as well as luxury head restraints in the front. This ride comfort can optionally be boosted still further with the Active Multicontour Seat package. In addition to the special multicontour seats, this encompasses such features as various massage functions, climate-controlled seats, and fast seat heating. This variant also offers electrically adjustable lumbar supports for the driver and front passenger. Exclusive “Edition 1” special model The new Mercedes-AMG G 63 is also available as an exclusive “Edition 1” model. The combination of equipment details turns the special model into the flagship of the range. The available paint finishes are magnetite black, obsidian black, iridium silver, mojave silver, selenite grey, designo graphite metallic, designo platinum black, designo mystic white bright, designo platinum magno and designo night black magno. As a discreet contrast the sports stripes along the vehicle sides are in matt graphite grey. The exterior mirror housings have a decorative red stripe while the AMG Night package with features in high-gloss black, reinforce the muscular impression. The matte black 22-inch forged wheels in a cross-spoke design have red-painted rim flanges. Engine: 4.0-litre V8 with two turbochargers
Output: 430 kW at 6.000 rpm
Combined fuel consumption: 13.1 l/100 km
Acceleration 0-100 km/h: 4.5 s
Recommended retail price: R2,591,000 and R2,891,000 for “Edition 1”   Read: Mercedes-Benz launches R1 million V6 double-cab bakkie