TymeBank has ‘soft’ launched in South Africa, with the group allowing prospective customers to open an account. This marks the first of a handful of new banks to enter the South African market, with other major players – Discovery Bank and Bank Zero – set to launch in 2019. TymeBank is a digital-only bank with no physical branches or ATMs – but customers can gain access to their funds through ATMs, and sales points at Pick n Pay and other major retailers. The group also has a physical presence through kiosks at select Pick n Pay and Boxer stores. This is currently limited to six stores, but Tyme plans to expand this across the country. The appeal of a digital banking is affordability, with many of the legacy costs of traditional banking falling away in a digital-only structure. Digital banking also squarely targets the large unbanked market with a mobile-first approach. While TymeBank is the first fully digital bank to launch in South Africa, traditional banks have for some time begun to migrate into the digital space. FNB got the jump on competitors earlier this year with the launch of eWallet eXtra – its fully digital account – which can be opened and used on mobile devices. According to FNB, more than 50,000 people registered for FNB’s eWallet eXtra within the first month of launching. FNB’s eWallet eXtra is entirely mobile-based, and works through USSD systems found on all mobile phones (including feature phones). Tyme meanwhile, works through a mobile app and online banking, but also offers a Visa debit card which allows for easier transacting. This is how South Africa’s first new digital-only accounts compare: Opening an account  TymeBank Accounts can be opened online, or in-store at a TymeBank kiosk. The process takes around 5 minutes, and requires a South African ID number and South African mobile phone number. Customers will also have to give a fingerprint to gain full access to accounts and a debit card. If you apply online, you will have to find a kiosk to give biometric data to upgrade to the full account. There are no fees attached to opening an account. eWallet eXtra Accounts can only be opened on mobile devices. Users need to dial *120*277# on their cellphone, enter their name, surname and SA ID number, and start banking on the eWallet eXtra account. There are no fees attached to opening an account Devices  TymeBank Supports online/internet banking and transactions through an Android App. An iOS app is not available at present – but internet banking can be accessed through all mobile browsers. To make use of internet banking and the app, a smartphone is required, but to withdraw or deposit cash, or use your debit card, you don’t need a smartphone with internet access. However, you need a working cell phone with a registered number to received One-Time PINS and other voucher codes. eWallet eXtra Services are accessed on mobile only through USSD. Works on all mobile devices. Physical presence  TymeBank Limited presence at present, with kiosks only available at select Pick n Pay and Boxer stores. This will be more expansive by the bank’s full launch in 2019. Pick n Pay Rosebank
Pick n Pay Bedfordview
Pick n Pay Kensington
Pick n Pay Kenilworth
Boxer West Street
Boxer Alexandra eWallet eXtra Support for eWallet eXtra can be found across FNB’s entire network of branches and ATMs. Services  TymeBank Withdrawals
Deposits
Sending Money
Payments (EFT)
Card swipes
Statements
Pick n Pay Smartshopper points
Prepaid products (coming soon)
Overdraft (coming soon) eWallet eXtra Withdrawals
Deposits
Sending Money
Payments (EFT)
Buying prepaid products
Statements Fees  Limits  TymeBank TymeBank has different limits depending on a customer’s banking profile (which is determined by how much the bank knows about them). A basic profile is given to those who sign up online, with the next level given to those who register biometric data. The final level is given when a residential address is given. The limits for the profiles are as follows: eWallet eXtra Daily spend limit of R3,000;
Monthly spend limit of R24,000;
Maximum account balance of R14,000. Read: TymeBank ‘soft’ launches in South Africa