Land Rover has announced its latest luxury compact SUV – the new Range Rover Evoque. The new Evoque features more pronounced shoulders and wheel arches, alongside 21-inch wheels. Other notable external changes include the introduction of super-slim Matrix LED headlamps, and flush door handles.     Internally Land Rover boasts a ‘minimalist and digital cabin’, with recycled plastics offered as premium alternatives to leather. “The cabin is designed to be a calm and serene space, ensuring comfortable, healthy and happy occupants, with technologies such as the twin touchscreen Touch Pro Duo system, featuring new, faster software, 16-way seat controls and cabin air ionisation that complement the increased interior space,” Land Rover said. “If rear visibility is compromised by passengers or bulky items, the driver simply flicks a switch on the underside of the mirror and a camera feed from the top of the car displays what is behind the vehicle in crisp high definition. The screen provides a wider (50-degree) field of vision and superior visibility in low light.” The new Range Rover Evoque is also the first to feature Ground View technology, which effectively makes the bonnet invisible by projecting camera imagery onto the upper touchscreen to show the driver a 180-degree view under the front of the vehicle. This is useful when negotiating difficult parking spaces, navigating high city centre kerbs or tackling rough terrain and is the realisation of the Transparent Bonnet technology previewed by Land Rover in 2014.    A longer wheelbase yields 20mm extra rear knee room and an increase in small item stowage. The luggage space is 10% larger (591 litres) as well as much wider. While Land Rand Rover did not discuss technical specifications or pricing for its South African models, it said that it will offer diesel and petrol variants – with the car available to purchase in the country in early 2019. Currently, the Evoque has four variants, five if you include the convertible. It starts with the Ingenium 2.0 litre 4-cylinder 132kW Turbocharged Diesel (Automatic) (4WD) – R790 700, while the top of the range Ingenium 2.0 litre 4-cylinder 213kW Turbocharged Petrol (Automatic) (4WD) costs R 1 007 800. Two international engine variants which could come to South Africa include: A 2.0-litre turbopetrol engine with 183 kW and 365 Nm of torque.
A 2.0-litre turbodiesel engine with 132 kW and 430 Nm of torque. Read: These 12 vehicles are in the running for South African Car of the Year 2019