Atterbury Property in partnership with the Erasmus Trust will kick off construction of a new multi-billion rand precinct in Waterkloof in early 2019 – which the developers are calling the “Waterfall City of Pretoria”. The Castle Gate project was first announced in 2016, with Atterbury partnering with the Erasmus family to develop the site that makes up the final remaining portion of the historical  Waterkloof farm. Approximately 15 minutes drive from Pretoria CBD, the site sits between the R21 and the N1 and provides easy access to all key urban points around Pretoria and Johannesburg. According to Atterbury managing director, James Ehlers, while the site is smaller than Waterfall City, it will still house a very similar user profile. The project will be developed in phases, starting in early 2019. The first phase consists of a 23,000 sqm lifestyle shopping centre, a 4,000 sqm office block and a gym, Atterbury said. A medical precinct will make up the remainder of the first phase. The shopping centre is scheduled to have an open-air restaurant area and a “park-like” feel, and is expected to open in 2020. “We are in talks with a group of private hospitals that plan to put together a cluster of five specialist hospitals. The location of this development is absolutely ideal for this type of use,” Ehlers said. Around 85,000 sqm is planned for office use and the group said that it is already in talks to finalise the first buildings. The last component of the development will be residential, comprising about 1,200 housing units. “We are talking to a number of big corporate tenants as well as government departments that could possibly take up space in the development,” Ehlers said. Following construction starting on the shopping mall early 2019, the rest of the development will start in phases towards the end of next year with the first smaller buildings also being completed around the same time as the shopping centre. The whole development could be completed in the next five years, Atterbury said. Location  Development plan  Renders  Read: A look at the new R1.2 billion high-rise luxury apartments in Waterfall City