Pick n Pay has published its full catalogue of Black Friday deals, showing what you can pick up at discounted rates at your local store. According to John Bradshaw, head of marketing at Pick n Pay, the group has never seen so much enthusiasm about a promotion before. Customers can expect discounts of up to 60% across many categories, including appliances, tech, liquor, food, toiletries, household products and clothing. While electronics and appliances are a favourite for many Black Friday shoppers seeking a great deal, many customers have asked for deals on basic essentials. “We have worked very hard to make sure that our customers not only get the best priced deals, but that they get the products they want this Black Friday. Special arrangements were made with our suppliers so that we could get more stock than ever before and cater to as many customers as possible,” he said. “In-store, we will have additional staff helping on the floor to move and unpack products and assist customers with their purchases, even pushing a customer’s trolley to their car. We have also increased our staffing complement to process online orders and have added additional delivery and collections slots so that customers can enjoy their purchases as soon as possible. “The safety of our customers remains very important to us. We have taken extra precautions in stores where we anticipate the most activity to ensure a safe and happy shopping experience on Black Friday,” he said. All Pick n Pay stores will open at 06h59 on Black Friday and the deals will go live on its online shop (www.pnp.co.za) at a minute past midnight. The Pick n Pay online shop will also have selected online-only deals. On Wednesday (21 November 2018) Black Friday deals launched in Pick n Pay Hypermarkets across the country with incredible deals on items such as televisions, fridges and many more. Now you can see what your local stores have on offer. The catalogue below is for all the in-land Pick n Pay stores – for the offers in the Western Cape, Eastern Cape and KwaZulu-Natal, you can view the deals on Pick n Pay’s site. Pick n Pay Black Friday Inland by BusinessTech on Scribd (function() { var scribd = document.createElement("script"); scribd.type = "text/javascript"; scribd.async = true; scribd.src = "https://www.scribd.com/javascripts/embed_code/inject.js"; var s = document.getElementsByTagName("script")[0]; s.parentNode.insertBefore(scribd, s); })(); The full catalogue for Pick n Pay Hypermarkets is also below: Pick n Pay Hypermarket Blac… by on Scribd  Read: Pick n Pay launches Black Friday 2018 deals