While Black Friday is typically seen as a major retail shopping day, South Africans can expect deals on a wide range of items. In 2018 this will include a number of motoring deals, with discounts on everything from cars to tyres, rentals, and tune-ups. BusinessTech looked at some of the best deals below. Bidvest Car Rental  Bidvest Car Rental has announced that it will be offering unbelievable Black Friday Deals for your summer holiday car hire. It added that special rates will be available online from 23 November, from 00:01 to 23:59. Bidvest McCarthy  Bidvest McCarthy has confirmed that it will have a number of deals on cars which will go live at midnight on Friday. Ford  Fury Ford, Eagle Ford, and a number of other dealerships have confirmed that they will be offering a number deals on bakkies and cars as part of their Black Friday 2018 sales. Gumtree  A number of sellers on Gumtree have announced special Black Friday deals on used cars through the classifieds platform. Hi-Q  Hi-Q has announced that it will be running specials on tyres from 19 – 24 November. It is also offering a special on a services package for only R99. JustCarHire  JustCarHire has announced that if you book your car rental through them on Black Friday, it will cover your excess. Land Rover  Land Rover is currently hosting a ‘Black November’ special, with massive discounts on its Discovery and Range Rover lines. OUTsurance OUTsurance has promised great deals on car insurance to ensure that you have more money to spend this Black Friday. Renault Gauteng  Renault Gauteng has announced a number of specials on vehicle and services for Black Friday 2018. Volkswagen  A number of Volkswagen dealerships have confirmed to BusinessTech that they will be hosting Black Friday deals. Notably, Soweto VW will be opening its doors early and have a number of deals on pre-selected deals. Wesbank  Wesbank is offering a number of deals through its Wshop – including discounts on navigation systems, audio, and paint protection. Volvo  Volvo has announced that it will pay the first 12 months instalments on XC90, S90, V90 Cross Country or XC60 on Black Friday. The offer is only valid from 9 to 24 November 2018 at Volvo dealerships countrywide and delivery of the vehicle needs to take place by 31 December 2018. Read: Makro and Game reveal their Black Friday 2018 deals