The Pinnacle – a landmark building opposite the Cape Sun Hotel on Strand Street in Cape Town – has been relaunched as a mixed-use multimillion-rand redevelopment that will offer 239 micro-apartments. The development is modelled on a work-play-live scenario aimed primarily at millennials and generation-X wanting to get their foot into Cape Town’s pricey property market door “For a long time, the first-time home-buyer market in Cape Town hasn’t been easy to penetrate, and I wanted to change that,” said Dawie Swart, CEO of asset-management company Investicore which owns The Pinnacle. “The concept behind micro-living is creating a neighbourhood within the building, and at The Pinnacle, we’ve done just that,” said Swart. He added that the building will boast a micro-community where like-minded individuals live together in fully integrated social spaces. This includes a rooftop swimming pool, on-site restaurants and retail,Wi-Fi with hot desks, and meeting rooms. The Pinnacle’s lock-up-and-go apartments are also complemented by 24/7 security.   Apartments The designer apartments are the work of Grant Gillis, renowned international interior designer and CEO of Delta International Design Studio. They all feature the comforts of modern living coupled with innovative spaces that move and adapt to their inhabitants’ needs. “Electricity and water usage is something that Capetonians need to be aware of, and we considered these factors in the design and construction of the apartments,” said Swart. The apartments are kitted out with brand-new kitchen appliances and LED lights, helping to keep energy usage as low as possible. The micro-apartments offer cost-effective levies, and the rates and bond repayments are manageable. Other apartment features include: Air Conditioning
Gorenje Appliances
Built-in under-counter fridges (Micro)
Convection Microwave/Oven (Micro)
Built-in cupboards (BIC)
Vinyl Timber Floors
Fibre Optic Internet & DSTV Network
Optional furniture pack   “We’re seeing huge interest by city workers anxious to spend more time enjoying their spare time and less time commuting,” said Emanuel Germanis, managing director of Evolution Properties, which has the sole-mandate to sell The Pinnacle. “We’re happy to sit with prospective buyers and help them make the right informed choice to suit their pocket.” 48 apartments have already been sold off plan, with prices starting at R1.25 million for a 31 sqm micro-apartment. Alternatively, a 36 sqm micro-apartment will set you back R2 million. A number of studio 1- and 2-bedroom apartments are also available – with prices ranging from R1.7 million to R3.6 million. Read: Here’s what the rate hike means for your home loan