While shoppers clamour for Black Friday specials at major retailers this weekend, there almost isn’t a single category of product or service that isn’t getting in on the craze. From sex toys to cymbals, we’ve listed some niche or more unconventional specials that you may not have been aware of below: Sex toys and Lingerie  Stores specialising in adult entertainment certainly have not given Black Friday a miss, with many sales on offer for those looking to tap into their kinkier side. Adult World will be discounting select products by as much as 50%,
Luvland will be having 50% off everything on the 23rd
Désir is having daily specials all the way up to Black Friday.
MySexShop.co.za will have specials on sex toys and other adult goods.
AdultShopSA will be running specials all weekend. Flowers  Online florists have a busy day planned for Black Friday. Be sure to double check delivery times and options. NetFlorist offering up to 70% off select items on the day.
Bloomable (formerly SA Florist) is also joining with 20% off all products until Monday. Fitness and Supplements  While fitness goals are usually reserved for the new year – and certainly not ahead of the heavy-eating festive season – the many sports shops and fitness groups running Black Friday specials might get you on board. Sportsmans Warehouse will be running 50 specials on the day.
MiFitness is running deals on its heavy duty equipment.
Supplement World planning a Black Friday blowout.
Chrome Supplements already on board with up to 85% off on its deals. Golfing  If your weekend pastimes see you heading onto the green, there are a few golfing specials you can find this weekend. Golfer’s Club will be running Black Friday specials the entire weekend, 23 to 25 November. Tattoos and Piercings  If you’ve been umming and ahing about whether or not to get that tattoo, maybe a good special might push you in the right direction. Some tattoo parlours are offering good deals on getting inked this weekend. Changed Forever Tattoos in Pretoria will have an auction on several R1,000 tattoo designs (the winner gets the design and the tattoo).
Dakota Lee Tattoos in Joburg will be running a buy 1 get 1 free for a friend all weekend (walk-ins only).
Red Liquid Tattoos in Port Elizabeth will also be running a Black Friday deal where you can get up 50% off your tattoo. Home building and DIY  Black Friday is great chance to get ahead with any DIY or home projects, with plenty of building specialists and home services offering some good deals. Builder’s Warehouse and Express will be having a sale (with some online deals already live).
Live Copper has lighting and plumbing specials ready for Friday.
Lighting Warehouse will have specials on lighting and fixtures.
CTM has something in store for Friday to complement its festive season specials already running. Guns and Ammunition  If home and personal security is more on your mind, there is plenty on offer. Security Hyperstore is also running up to 75% off in its Black Friday specials, which includes air rifles, bows and arrows and many other self-defence products.
Frontier Guns is running Black Friday deals on its firearms.
GunSA is also offering limited specials for the day.
NSN Guns has already started its Black Friday specials, offering R2,000 of select rifles.
Powderkeg.co.za is running a ‘Ballistix Friday’ special on the proudly South African Ballistix brand bullets. Pet Food and Care  Black Friday doesn’t only have to be for you – you can see to your best friend, too. Pet Heaven will be running online specials this Friday for cat and dog food, toys and other products.
ePETstore has kept the Black Friday tradition alive for a few years already, and will continue with specials in 2018.
DogOnline is making orange the new black with its Orange Wednesday specials which are running through to 26 November. Sound and Music  Black Friday is also hear for the musicians, with a bunch of stores coming through with deals and specials that you might like the sound of. Audiomart will be having online specials on sound equipment and instruments on Black Friday, with specials on things like speakers, mixers and guitars.
Marshall Music will also be running specials with up to 50% off selected products.
Music Experience meanwhile will be running up to 45% off amps, instruments, drums and studio production gear. Read: Early Black Friday deals from Makro, Game, Clicks, Woolworths and more