With more than 46 million Toyota Corollas sold globally since its introduction in 1966, it would be difficult to find a driver who did not recognise the name. The Japanese carmaker has revealed its reconfigured 2020 Toyota Corolla sedan. The 12th-generation Toyota Corolla will be based on the Toyota New Global Architecture (TNGA), “which is far more than a new body structure, bringing together new approaches to engineering, design, assembly, and materials”. “The Corolla sedan’s bold new look is a perfect reflection of the bumper-to-bumper, wheels-to-roof transformation that has taken place. The TNGA platform means an available engine that produces more power than its predecessor yet delivers better fuel efficiency. “TNGA imbues the Corolla sedan with greater agility, yet also with its smoothest, quietest ride. TNGA also means an elevated feeling of quality in every surface, switch and control the driver sees and touches. “And, critically, TNGA delivers on Toyota’s commitment to driver and passenger safety with the Toyota Safety Sense 2.0 suite of active safety systems – standard on every Corolla sedan model,” the group said in a press statement. The Corolla will also be offered in hybrid form, Toyota said. The new Corolla is expected to arrive in South Africa in 2020. Design Transformation From every angle, the new Corolla sedan looks lower and leaner, tauter and tighter, the Japanese company said. The 2020 Corolla sedan rides on a 106.3-inch wheelbase, like its predecessor, yet any commonality ends there. Corolla sedan’s dynamic performance and stance benefit greatly from wider front (+0.47 in.) and rear (+0.87 in.) track dimensions. The front fascia details vary by model grade, with the SE and XSE putting on the sportiest face, including a body-color chin spoiler and aero stabilising fins to emphasise the wide stance. “The available Adaptive Front-lighting System (AFS) provides a wider field of light and steers the low beam in the direction of the turn, based on steering angle and vehicle speed, Toyota said. “The rear leaves a distinct lighting impression as well, with narrow combination lamps that wrap deeply into the fenders. All 2020 Corolla sedan models use LEDs, the type and style varying by model grade. The sporty grades feature smoked outer light lenses,” it said. Colours include Celestite Grey Metallic, Blizzard Pearl, Super White, Classic Silver Metallic, Black Sand Pearl, Barcelona Red, Blue Crush Metallic and Blueprint. The 2020 Corolla sedan L, LE, and XLE grades will use the 1.8-litre engine found in the previous generation, yet with more horsepower and better fuel efficiency. The XSE and SE grades are powered by a completely-new 2.0-liter Dynamic-Force direct-injection inline four-cylinder engine. This new engine delivers more performance while using less fuel. “Remarkably, the new Corolla sedan engine is physically smaller and lighter, helping to lower the car’s center of gravity and improve its overall balance, Toyota said.  Read: The new R2.6 million Mercedes G-Class has arrived in South Africa – take a look