South African motoring start-up, True Price, has released a new comparison focusing on the Toyota Corolla, Volkswagen Golf and Ford Focus. The three cars are often top sellers within the C-Segment hatch/sedan sector of the South African car market, and all three also have strong brand recognition in the country. True Price’s comparison was based on an analysis of cars that have driven set distances and then calculated the actual price achieved on auction as a percentage of the original retail price. In the zero to 100,000 km category, the Corolla achieved 66% of its original retail sales price versus the Golf at 61% and the Focus at 53%. In the 100,000 to 200,000 km category, the Corolla achieved 52% of its original retail sales price versus the Golf at 48% and the Focus at 42%. In the 200,000 km plus category, the Corolla achieved 46% of its original retail sales price versus the Golf at 41% and the Focus at 38%. “No matter which category you look at, the Corolla reigns supreme,” said Darryl Jacobson, MD of True Price. He attributes the domination of the Corolla to a variety of factors. “The Corolla, which has been manufactured for 43 years in South Africa, is somewhat of a motoring icon, with a huge following and a superior reputation. “It’s a massive success internationally too. It overtook Ford’s Model T and Volkswagen’s Beetle some time ago, becoming the best-selling car model ever sold. More than 45 million have been sold globally since the Corolla was introduced in 1966,” he said. Jacobson added that the old “everything keeps going right” slogan of Toyota still resonates with many South Africans. “South Africans are comfortable with the Corolla. They perceive it as a very reliable vehicle that it supported by a massive dealer network,” he said. “Whenever a Toyota Corolla comes up on the auction floor there is definitely a buzz from the auctioneer and the buyers. There’s never a doubt that a Toyota Corolla will sell on auction, where as the Golf and more so the Focus can go unsold.” While sales of C-Segment hatch/sedan models are declining in South Africa in favour of cheaper cars and sports utility vehicles, Jacobson says that the Corolla will always maintain its superb resale value. “It’s an iconic product that South Africans know and love. The same sentiments will apply to the new Corolla, when it is launched here in 2019,” he said. Read: Ford reveals more affordable EcoSport