The Pearson Institute of Higher Education (PIHE) has announced the launch of its newly structured, fast-tracked Bachelor of Commerce (BCom) and Bachelor of Business Administration (BBA) Programmes for 2019. The fast-tracked courses mean that it is possible to complete a degree in two years –  the first programme of its kind in higher education in South Africa, said Pearson. The accelerated BBA programme will initially be offered at the PIHE Midrand Campus only, while the accelerated BCom programme will be offered at all the South African campuses except the Midrand campus. Ebrahim Matthews, MD of Pearson Institute, says that this advancement in the higher education sector is a significant one, particularly in light of the challenges faced by South Africa’s youth and their communities. “We know that the youth of South Africa are book-ended by both enormous challenges and unlimited potential. “At Pearson Institute we keep innovating to try and provide learning solutions that will be the answer to the stumbling blocks that hold our youngsters back from getting a quality tertiary education. Our accelerated degrees shows such innovation.” Bachelor of Business Administration The Accelerated Bachelor of Business Administration prepares students for work in many areas of business and is an excellent foundation for careers in commerce, marketing, human resources and financial management. Students will cover core modules such as Business Management, Economics, Project Management, Business Ethics, Business Law and Financial Management. Students also cover subject areas such as Business English and Computer Skills, as well as a choice of specialist elective groups with major subjects. Because of the degree’s unique emphasis on application, students will select, conduct and present a research project and complete Work Integrated Learning projects. Bachelor of Commerce (BCom) The Accelerated Bachelor of Commerce prepares students for work in any area of business. Students will cover the broad principles of commerce and management with a focus on business management, human resource management and marketing. Students will also develop a sound foundation in accounting, financial management, project management, economics, research methodology and organisational behaviour. Because of Pearson’s unique teaching and learning approaches, students will also develop essential skills for the world of work, such as analytical thinking, effective decision-making, working in teams and communicating confidently. The accelerated BCom programme blends face-to-face Lecture-Based Learning and Technology Enhanced Learning. Our teaching staff is a mix of full-time academics and working professionals to ensure students benefit from quality academic and industry-specific inputs, said Pearson. Read: The best universities in South Africa to study business and law