The Department of Home Affairs plans to expand its Smart ID and passport partnership with South Africa’s banks, by adding 20 additional branches to the programme in major urban centres. The Smart ID partnership was launched in 2015, with Standard Bank, Absa, Nedbank and FNB joining the programme. The service allows South Africans to go to select bank branches to apply for the new Smart ID card, book an appointment to capture biometrics, and then be notified when the card is ready for collection. Speaking to IOL, the department revealed that, to date, the participating banks have processed in excess of 168,000 Smart IDs and over 152,000 passports. According to the department, it intends to open 20 more branches in SA banks, targeting other urban areas, such as Durban, Pietermaritzburg, East London, Nelspruit and Polokwane. All but one of the participating branches are located in Gauteng, with Standard Bank at Canal Walk in the Western Cape being the only branch outside the province. It aims to finalise the public-private partnership with the banking sector before the end of the current financial year. How to apply for a Smart ID If you select a bank branch when applying for a Smart ID or passport, you are asked to book an appointment to have your fingerprints captured and photograph taken. Once your application is paid and your biometric data is captured, Home Affairs will send you an SMS when your smart ID or passport is ready for collection. If there isn’t a supported bank branch near you, you will have to go to one of the 184 Home Affairs branches equipped to process Smart IDs. A full list can be found here. The department currently has the Smart ID services available at 13 banks. The pilot was run at 14 banks, but the service at the Absa branch at Ghandi Square, Johannesburg, has since closed. The 13 bank branches include: Absa Lifestyle Centre – Centurion
Absa Towers – Johannesburg
FNB Towers -Johannesburg
FNB Lifestyle Centre – Centurion
FNB Menlyn – Pretoria
FNB Merchant – Sandton
Nedbank Arcadia – Pretoria
Nedbank Constantia Kloof – Johannesburg
Nedbank Rivonia – Sandton
Standard Bank – Centurion
Standard Bank Killarney Mall – Johannesburg
Standard Bank Simmonds Street – Johannesburg
Standard Bank Canal Walk – Western Cape Read: Everyone can finally get their smart IDs from these bank branches