Cell C has launched a spend control service, which will be available from mid-November, for those customers who go out of their out-of-bundle (OOB) spend. “Whether its voice, SMS or data, or even their total spend, Cell C customers will decide by how much or even if they want to go out-of-bundle,” the group said in a statement. Each service is treated separately, which means that customers have complete control over their costs at a personalised level across service categories independently, Cell C said. Using self-service channels such as USSD and the Cell C App, customers will be able to set their voice, data and SMS spend limit for OOB charges from no OOB charging to open OOB charging, or any rand value in between that best suits their budget. The service is flexible and allows customers to change these settings at no cost at any stage, thus ensuring that customers have complete and unrestricted control over their costs. “Customers can at any time set their out-of-bundle threshold to whatever they like and this will be applied for all out of bundle spend from that point forward. This gives them complete control over their costs,” said Cell C CCO Junaid Munshi. Cell C is also launching its new bundle depletion notifications, which will go a long way in keeping customers informed about how much data, voice or SMSes they still have available, the operator said. These new notifications don’t only apply to any bundles that customers may have, but are for all services included in postpaid and top up contracts as well. “Customers will know when their services are running low in advance so that they are able to manage their costs better by purchasing additional bundles or restricting out of bundle spend,” said Munshi. Cell C said it is also in the process of improving and expanding its data rollover service to make sure customers have ways to extend the validity of any data they have before it expires. “We are also finalising enhancement to our data transfer service which will allow customers to transfer any data to anyone on Cell C,” said Munshi. “We plan to implement both rollover and transfer in mid-December.” Read: Cell C completes roaming agreement with MTN