Pick n Pay has launched dedicated Black Friday deals for its online customers in Johannesburg, Pretoria and Cape Town as a ‘taste’ of what is to come. The retailer said that online customers can expect discounts of up to 50% across various categories on the Pick n Pay’s online shop, including liquor, food, toiletries and household products. Deals have also been launched for select appliances. The deals will run weekly from 5 to 25 November 2018. Pick n Pay said that it has also added more stores to the Click n Collect option for November. John Bradshaw, Pick n Pay’s head of marketing, said that the group wanted to give customers a taste of what to expect from them on Black Friday. “Over the next few weeks, we will continue to share the surprises we have planned to maximise Black Friday savings for all our customers.” Pick n Pay last month announced that it was preparing for their biggest Black Friday ever and that customers can expect deals and savings bigger and better than last year and across a variety of categories, both in-store and online. “We have been working extremely hard to bring our customers the best deals on one of the biggest shopping days of the day.” To avoid disappointment and cater to as many customers as possible, Pick n Pay has also made special arrangements to get more stock than ever before. “Not only have we arranged extra stock, but we have also increased our support team to help move and unpack products as fast as they can,” said Bradshaw. Mike Cotterell, GM for Online and Mobile, said that the website has also put measures in place to manage additional orders. “We will be able to scale our online infrastructure in real time as visitor volumes require so that our customers have an uninterrupted Black Friday online shopping experience. “We have also increased our staffing complement to process online orders and have added additional delivery and collections slots for our Black Friday deals so that customers can enjoy their purchases as soon as possible,” he said. Read: Pick n Pay to phase out plastic straws and trial paper bags by end of December