Replacing its predecessor after a successful 20-year life cycle, the all-new Suzuki Jimny is now available in South Africa. The 2018 Suzuki Jimny arrives with the choice of two specification levels (GA and GLX), two transmission options (five speed manual and four speed automatic) and a host of made-for-adventure accessories. What is not optional, is the in-built off-road capability with ALLGRIP PRO mechanical shifting 4×2, 4×4 and 4×4 low range transfer case and the rigid ladder frame chassis. Under the bonnet, Suzuki has fitted its modern K15B petrol engine. This 1.5 litre four cylinder unit replaces the 1.3 litre M13A engine of the previous model and delivers 75kW at 6,000 rpm and 130 Nm at 4,000 rpm. Fuel consumption on a combined cycle has been tested at 6.3 litres for the manual models and 6.8 litres for the automatic model. In contrast, the previous generation Jimny was rated at 7.2 litres and 7.8 litres per 100 km respectively. “The new Jimny not only shares many of the design cues of its forebears – the LJ, SJ and Jimny – it also shares their engineering ethos of providing a no-compromise off-road capable vehicle that is accessible to everyone. “In the absence of many affordable 4×4 vehicles, this philosophy of building a compact and capable off-road vehicle at an affordable price is now more needed than ever. And it has seen the Jimny quickly log multi-year waiting lists in many of the countries in which it has been introduced,” said André Venter, divisional head for sales and marketing at Suzuki Auto South Africa. Venter said that every one of the four generations of the Suzuki Jimny has kept to the same design brief. Build a compact, lightweight, affordable off-road vehicle with true 4×4 capabilities. In the new generation, this is in its most concentrated form, thanks to the Jimny Chief Engineer Hiroyuki Yenezawa’s philosophy of “making the Jimny more attractive by refining every small detail of the model’s design.”  The all-new Suzuki Jimny’s striking angular design pays direct homage to the original LJ Series (1970 – 1981) and SJ Series (1981 – 1998). The new model has the same upturned front fenders, round headlamps and round orange indicators of the LJ Series and the side slits in the clamshell bonnet of the SJ Series. The upright grille is reminiscent of the previous generation’s Jimny (1998 – 2018) and the SJ Series. The upright design of the roof pillars also enables the roof to carry more weight, which is ideal for a roof rack, rooftop tent and for rollover safety in case of an accident. This is further supported by the new model’s all-round drip rail, which has been designed to allow for easy clamping of roof racks, while also being a practical way of keeping passengers dry from water on the roof as they enter or exit the vehicle. More applicable for overland enthusiasts are the angled front and rear bumpers that not only keep them out of the way of rocks and shrubs, but also increase the approach and departure angles. The front bumper design also exposes more of the tyre tread on a horizontal plane for greater climbing capability in rocky off-road conditions. At the rear of the vehicle, Suzuki designers have moved all the lights into the horizontal rear bumper, which has allowed them to create a wider rear door, for increased practicality.   Read: Jaguar’s electric I-Pace SUV – South African pricing