Ford is bolstering its presence in the sport utility vehicle (SUV) category in South Africa with a revised Kuga range. The revised line-up drops the Titanium specification in favour of a new ST-Line for the powerful 2.0-litre EcoBoost and TDCi models. The Kuga range also gains an extremely competitive all-new offering in the frugal yet punchy 88kW 1.5 TDCi turbodiesel-engined models, available in Ambiente and Trend specification levels matched to a six-speed manual gearbox. “The new Ford Kuga is an exceptional offering in the highly competitive SUV segment, and we’ve now made it even more appealing to buyers across the spectrum,” said Doreen Mashinini, GM, marketing at FMCSA. “At the pinnacle of the range, the stunning new ST-Line gives the Kuga the eye-catching design and dynamic flair to match the superb performance of the 2.0-litre petrol and diesel models. “At the same time, the introduction of the extremely efficient yet lively 1.5-litre TDCi engine ensures that we fulfil the requirements of customers that prioritise low fuel consumption and budget-friendly running costs,” Mashinini said. The Kuga ST-Line  stands out from the rest of the range thanks to the high-gloss Ebony Black finish for the front grille, along with a honeycomb design for the lower portion of the grille and matching sports mesh finish on the fog lamp bezels. Extensive colour coding for the integrated body kit incorporates the front skid plate, side skirts, mirrors, door handles, rear roof spoiler and wheel arches to provide a lithe and eye-catching appearance, set against contrasting elements such as the high-gloss Ebony Black rear diffuser, black roof rails, tinted front and rear lights, as well as privacy glass for the rear windows. The cabin includes sport seats trimmed in partial leather, picked out with contrasting stitching for the seats, steering wheel and gear lever gaiter. The Kuga’s steering system employs a revised calibration to deliver a tighter, more responsive and sporty feel. New 1.5 TDCi For the first time the Ford Kuga will be available with a 1.5 TDCi turbodiesel engine. The 1.5-litre unit shares the advanced diesel technologies with the existing 2.0 TDCi engine, including a lean NOX trap for cleaner exhaust emissions. Power is rated at 88kW along with a peak torque output of 270Nm. Two 1.5 TDCi models have been introduced to the line-up, comprising the Ambiente and Trend series, both of which employ front-wheel drive and a six-speed manual transmission. The 2.0 TDCi, which produces 132kW of power and a substantial 400Nm of torque, is now exclusive to the new ST-Line series, combined with Ford’s Intelligent All Wheel Drive system and six-speed PowerShift Automatic gearbox. The 1.5-litre EcoBoost petrol models are only available in FWD guise, starting off with the Ambiente that uses a six-speed manual transmission and delivers 110kW and 240Nm. Buyers can also opt for the six-speed torque converter automatic with 132kW on tap, available in Ambiente or the more luxurious Trend specification. The most powerful offering is the 2.0 EcoBoost ST-Line, which delivers an exhilarating 177kW punch allied to 340Nm of torque. Power is transmitted to the AWD system via a smooth-shifting six-speed torque converter automatic transmission.  Ford Kuga – Recommended Retail Prices: 1.5 EcoBoost Ambiente FWD 6MT: R384,900
1.5 EcoBoost Ambiente FWD 6AT: R398,500
1.5 TDCi Ambiente FWD 6MT: R426,200
1.5 EcoBoost Trend FWD 6AT: R445,900
1.5 TDCi Trend FWD 6MT: R456,200
2.0 EcoBoost ST-Line AWD 6AT: R548,500
2.0 TDCi ST-Line AWD 6AT: R566,900 Read: South Africa’s best cars, SUVs and bakkies – ranked by affordability