The Department of Home Affairs plans to expand its Smart ID and passport partnership with South Africa’s banks, by adding 20 additional branches to the programme in major urban centres. The Smart ID partnership was launched in 2015, with Standard Bank, Absa, Nedbank and FNB joining the programme. The service allows South Africans to go to select bank branches to apply for the new Smart ID card, book an appointment to capture biometrics, and then be notified when the card is ready for collection. The department currently has the Smart ID services available at the following 13 bank branches: Absa Lifestyle Centre – Centurion
Absa Towers – Johannesburg
FNB Towers -Johannesburg
FNB Lifestyle Centre – Centurion
FNB Menlyn – Pretoria
FNB Merchant – Sandton
Nedbank Arcadia – Pretoria
Nedbank Constantia Kloof – Johannesburg
Nedbank Rivonia – Sandton
Standard Bank – Centurion
Standard Bank Killarney Mall – Johannesburg
Standard Bank Simmonds Street – Johannesburg
Standard Bank Canal Walk – Western Cape The department has since revealed that, to date, the participating banks have processed in excess of 168,000 Smart IDs and over 152,000 passports. According to the department, it intends to open 20 more branches in SA banks, targeting other urban areas, such as Durban, Pietermaritzburg, East London, Nelspruit and Polokwane. Based on feedback from the banks running the trial, the 20 new branches appear to be from FNB and Absa. Standard Bank and Nedbank provided no feedback on their plans. FNB FNB said that it currently has three live sites in Gauteng with the fourth under revamp. “We have identified additional branches in all other Provinces in metro environments and working with the DHA on implementation dates,” it said. The group says that it aims to have 11 sites live as part of its second phase of roll-out, though it did not specify where. Absa Absa said it currently has two branches with a Department of Home Affairs presence, assisting with IDs and Passports (Centurion Lifestyle Branch, Towers North Branch) and has nine more in the pipeline: Sandton City, Johannesburg
Stellenbosch, Western Cape
Greenacres, Eastern Cape
Menlyn Maine, Tshwane
Key West, North West
Claremont, Western Cape
Rosebank Mall, Johannesburg
Pinetown, KwaZulu Natal
Fourways, Johannesburg Standard Bank and Nedbank did not respond to questions by the time of publication.