Audi has revealed its Audi e-Tron GT Concept – a 434 kW (590 horsepower) beast to ensure performance fit for a sports car. It follows in the footsteps of the Audi e-tron SUV and the Audi e‑tron Sportback slated for 2019. Flat, wide and with a long wheelbase – those are the proportions of a classic Gran Turismo. And the Audi e‑tron GT concept reflects these with its 4.96-meter (16.3 ft) length, 1.96-meter (6.4 ft) width and 1.38‑meter (4.5 ft) height, the German carmaker said. “The broad lines and the numerous functional elements of the body as well as the air vents of the wheel arches and the solid rear diffuser emphasise its origins in the wind tunnel. A low drag coefficient that reduces fuel consumption and the low uplift visually characterise the design.” Separate electric motors are fitted to the front and rear axles. In both cases these are permanently excited synchronous motors. They put down the torque onto the road via all four driven wheels – naturally the new Audi e-tron GT concept is also a genuine quattro, the group said. In future, the vehicle should accelerate from 0 to 100 km/h (0-62.1 mph) in around 3.5 seconds before going on to 200 km/h (124.3 mph) in just over 12 seconds. The top speed is regulated at 240 km/h (149.1 mph) to maximise the range. The range of the concept car will be over 400 kilometres (248.5 mi). The required drive energy comes from a lithium-ion battery with an energy content of more than 90 kWh, which takes up the entire underfloor area between the front and rear axle with its flat design. The battery in the Audi e-tron GT concept can be charged in several ways: using a cable which is connected behind the flap in the left front wing, or by means of contactless induction with Audi Wireless Charging. “Here a charging pad with integral coil is installed permanently on the floor where the car is to be parked, and connected to the power supply. The alternating magnetic field induces an alternating voltage in the secondary coil fitted in the floor of the car, across the air gap. With a charging output of 11 kW the Audi e-tron GT concept can be fully charged conveniently overnight,” Audi said. Wired charging is much faster as the four-door coupe is fitted with an 800-volt system. This substantially reduces charging times compared with conventional systems that are currently in use. Thus it takes around 20 minutes to recharge the battery to 80 percent of its capacity, once again providing a range of more than 320 kilometres (198.8 mi) (WLTP). By 2025 Audi said it will offer twelve automobiles with all-electric drive in the most important markets worldwide and achieve roughly one-third of its sales with electrified models. “The SUVs within this portfolio include the Audi e-tron and the Audi e-tron Sportback due to make its debut in 2019. In addition, there will be a range of models with classic body layout such as Avant and Sportback. The range will cover every relevant market segment from the compact to the full-size class.” The technology in the Audi e-tron Sportback was developed in collaboration with Porsche; the design and character of the e-tron GT concept are packed full of unmistakable Audi DNA. The project will be developed into volume-production models by the end of 2020. Initial deliveries will be made to customers in early 2021, Audi said.  Read: Audi launches battery-powered crossover E-Tron