The Moldova Citizenship-by-Investment (MCBI) program – the latest investment migration opportunity in Europe – has officially launched and is accepting applications. Henley &  Partners, a residence and citizenship planning company – in partnership with its consortium partner, the Moldovan Investment Company – are assisting the Government of the Republic of Moldova in designing, implementing, and internationally promoting the much-anticipated MCBI program. Amanda Smit, director, head of Henley & Partners Central, Eastern and Southern Africa, said: “The launch of this prestigious new European program is momentous in the investment migration community as it boosts the industry’s relevance and value. “The MCBI program offers investors a foothold in Europe and access to one of the fastest growing commercial hubs in the region, while also giving Moldova the chance to attract much-needed foreign direct investment and a set of highly qualified and carefully vetted new citizens.” The MCBI program requires applicants to make a defined economic contribution to the country through its Public Investment Fund. In exchange, and subject to a stringent vetting and due diligence process, applicants and their families are granted full citizenship rights that are transferrable without restrictions to future generations. They also gain a passport that facilitates travel access to 122 destinations around the world, including Russia, Turkey, and the countries in Europe’s Schengen Area. The Moldovan passport is one of the highest historical climbers on the Henley Passport Index, having ascended an impressive 20 places since 2008. “The Moldovan Government is working hard to continue this upward trend and has already signed several visa-waiver agreements with foreign countries this year, further boosting the power of the Moldovan passport,” Henley & Partners said. “The attractiveness of the MCBI program lies in the country’s unique geographic position at the crossroads of Europe, the Middle East, and Asia and its robust passport strength, combined with the genuine affordability and accessibility of the program. “Moldova is a high-growth, high-potential European country, with strong economic and diplomatic ties with the EU, and many individuals around the world want to be part of its current and future successes. “Certainly, Henley & Partners is proud to be a partner to this remarkable nation, whose citizenship-by-investment program is set to redefine the European investment migration landscape,” said Smit. Henley & Partners said it has recently recorded an upsurge of 229% year-on-year in South Africans applying for alternative citizenship, mostly looking into European states such as Malta and Cyprus. This marked increase in applications can be attributed to a growing recognition of the need for global mobility, it said. The MCBI program, with its highly competitive pricing structure, will appeal to those who are not necessarily looking to relocate but who would like to secure a ‘plan B’ or expanded traveling access for themselves and their families. Program Overview The program offers citizenship in a European country with visa-free access to 122 destinations, including Russia, Turkey, and Europe’s Schengen Area, within a highly competitive pricing structure. To qualify for citizenship, the main applicant must be over 18 years of age, meet the application requirements, and make the qualifying contribution. Applicants must make a minimum non-refundable contribution to the Public Investment Fund (PIF): EUR 100,000 for a single applicant (R1.6 million)
EUR 115,000 for a couple (R1.86 million)
EUR 145,000 for a family of four (R2.3 million)
EUR 155,000 for a family of five or more (R2.5 million) Government service provider and licensed agent fees amount to EUR 35,000 per application. In addition, applicants are required to pay government fees of EUR 5,000 for the main applicant, EUR 2,500 for a spouse, EUR 1,000 for a child aged 0 to 15 years, EUR 2,500 for a dependent child aged 16 to 29 years, and EUR 5,000 for a dependent parent — of the main applicant or of the spouse — who is 55 years of age or older. Due diligence fees are EUR 6,000 for the main applicant and EUR 5,000 for a spouse, dependent children older than 16 years, and/or dependent parents. Biometric passport fees amount to EUR 300 per individual. Read: The most popular UK immigration options – for people that only have a South African passport