Jobs portal CareerJunction has published its latest index for the month of May 2018, showing which job skills are most in-demand right now, and which sectors are hiring. According to the group, the index settled at 103 index points for May 2018, indicating an increase in the ratio of vacancies per job seeker and therefore improved employment prospects. May saw an uptake in jobs of 7%, it said. “While labour demand is stable in most sectors, job volumes remain lower year-on-year. The building & construction, architecture & engineering sectors, as well as the sales and admin, office & support sectors, have experienced a considerable decrease in labour demand since May 2017,” CareerJunction said. “The sales and architecture & engineering sectors experienced the biggest decrease in jobs of 32% and 27% respectively.” Trending jobs for May include account management, internal auditing and executive management/director: Account Management Average salary offerings for intermediate level positions: GP: R20,833 to R23,929 p.m. (CTC)
WC: R15,125 to R20,500 p.m. (CTC)
KZN: Not enough information available. Internal Auditing Average salary offerings for intermediate level positions: GP: R31,833 to R43,170 p.m. (CTC)
WC: R29,167 to R39,042 p.m. (CTC)
KZN: Not enough information available. Executive Management/Director Average salary offerings for executive level positions: GP: R84,608 to R98,107 p.m. (CTC)
WC: R70,000 to R83,796 p.m. (CTC)
KZN: R63,481 to R88,944 p.m. (CTC) Most in-demand skills CareerJunction’s research shows that the following occupational fields are by far the most in demand skill sets in the job market currently: Software Development: “Software developers remain the most sought-after professionals on CareerJunction, particularly those with Java, C# and .Net skills.” Middle/Department Management: “Middle/department managers face good employment prospects as jobs are in abundance online. There is a particularly high demand for finance managers as more than 40% of all managerial vacancies are finance-related.” Financial/Project Accounting: “Hiring activity for candidates within the professional field of ‘financial/project accounting’ has been growing steadily. Since January, there has been an uptake in jobs for financial accountants of 10%.” Job demand by sector  According to CareerJunction, the IT, business & management and finance sectors are the most sought after sectors, followed by the sales, admin, office & support and architecture & engineering sectors, among others listed. When looking at active job seekers across various sectors (indicated by the Supply graph), areas of high supply correlate closely to areas of high demand, however supply outstrips demand in some areas, leading to a competitive environment for job seekers. The opposite is seen for some industries. Fluctuating demand is evident in the ICT, medical & health and marketing sectors over the last 12 months. Year-on-year, job volumes are down 19% in the ICT sector and 15% in the medical & health sector. Despite a steady increase in marketing jobs over the last two months, job volumes remain 4% lower year-on-year. Stabilising demand is seen within the finance, business & management and manufacturing & assembly sectors. The finance and manufacturing sectors have seen a recent upswing in hiring activity. Weakened demand is apparent in the building & construction, architecture & engineering sectors, as well as the sales and admin, office & support sectors, which have experienced a considerable decrease in labour demand since May 2017. The sales and architecture & engineering sectors experienced the biggest decrease in jobs of 32% and 27% respectively, the group saod. Read: South African salaries in 2018: what people earn