Columinate has revealed the results of its seventh annual Internet Banking SITEisfaction survey, showing that FNB has once again reclaimed its crown as the country’s best digital bank, ousting Capitec which rose to the top spot last year. The 2018 report highlights FNB as the overall winner, reclaiming its spot as the Best Digital Bank by owning both the Best Mobile Banking and Best Internet Banking categories. “Interesting to note is FNB’s rise in satisfaction levels was not as prominent as Capitec’s decline in satisfaction levels,” the group said. “This declining three-year trend may cost Capitec’s its reputation as a disruptor, and is likely due to Capitec’s customers punishing the bank for the platform’s frequent unavailability. This is a critical lesson for new entrants such as Tyme, Bank Zero, and Discovery to ensure they create a stable infrastructure, with little to no breaks in service or platform interruptions.” Despite Capitec losing its footing, it still outperformed Nedbank, Standard Bank and Absa by a wide margin. Launched in 2012, Columinate’s SITEisfaction survey is an annual measure of customer satisfaction with digital banking services in South Africa and rates each banking institution with a SITEisfaction score out of a possible 100. The report claims to be the only one of its kind to focus exclusively on these digital services and the South African banking sector considers it to be an essential feedback tool, as it reveals the behaviours and experiences of the banks’ online customers. To date, the SITEisfaction survey has engaged more than 13,000 internet and digital banking users, focusing specifically on the trends that shape the digital banking landscape. This is how the banks performed.  Customers’ satisfaction with their primary banks’ total banking experience have steadily and significantly been improving over the course of the last seven years, Columinate said. However, the SITEisfaction score with overall Internet Banking solutions has not enjoyed a similar improvement and continues to lag behind with a meagre 10 point rise from 54 in 2012 to 64 in 2018. With mobile banking – which takes a holistic look at all the mobile banking solutions banks offer, from mobile applications to mobi-sites for both mobile phones and tablets – the group noted a trend
in preference to use the app for anything that will save them a visit to a branch, from applying for new bank cards, opening new accounts, or even getting recent bank statements. “It makes sense for the banks to focus on creating a secure, well-rounded service offering through their mobile banking applications,” the group said. FNB scored two points higher in this year’s SITEisfaction study, netting them a tidy 82 to top the charts. Capitec suffered a minor setback, scoring three points less this year, but still putting up a very respectable 80. Standard Bank and Nedbank showed virtually no movement, both scoring 70 points, and Absa suffered a two point loss, trailing the field with 63 points. While FNB’s tablet app is rated the best application in the tablet category, it has to share the top spot with Capitec for best Smartphone app. Read: Michael Jordaan teases Bank Zero progress