Grant Thornton Johannesburg says that its CEO, Paul Badrick, has stepped aside voluntarily – pending the outcome of an investigation into sexual harassment allegations levelled against him. With immediate effect, Serena Ho, the chair of Grant Thornton Johannesburg’s governing board, will take an active role with the executive committee in the management of the firm and its communications, the accounting firm said in a statement on Tuesday (19 May 2018). Allegations against Badrick were made during an investigation by Grant Thornton International Limited (GTIL) following a former director’s claims of sexual harassment against a former head of forensics earlier this year. The sexual harassment allegations against Badrick occurred during 2015. No formal complaints were made until the GTIL investigation which has just ended, Grant Thornton said. Grant Thornton has said it will investigate the allegations as quickly as possible, while Badrick has stepped aside to allow the investigation to take place. Earlier this year, the firm apologised to two former employees who were sexually harassed by its former head of forensics, who had since left Grant Thornton’s employ. On Monday the firm said in a letter to clients, that it had “acknowledged mistakes in the way the matter was handled and the impact it had on the individuals concerned”. “We have written to the individual who raised the allegations to acknowledge that the former head of forensics’ conduct violated acceptable standards. We have offered her a meaningful settlement amount for the impact this has had, and we have again apologised to her unreservedly,” it said. The GTIL investigation was one of three independent investigations undertaken, Grant Thornton said. They include Grant Thornton launching its own external, independent probe headed by Jennifer Jeftha, a seasoned HR executive with significant board-level experience, while the company is also preparing a detailed report for the Commission for Gender Equality in response to their request for information. “We have zero tolerance for any form of harassment. We will continue to monitor and review and will take steps to address leadership challenges and the underlying culture,” the firm said. Read: The one way BEE is doing more harm than good