The South African Post Office has announced the transfer of over 1 million social grants beneficiaries from the outgoing CPS Sassa card to the new Sassa card issued by Postbank. In a statement released on Tuesday (26 June), SA Post Office COO Lindiwe Kwele said that this figure did not include those beneficiaries that have willingly opted to take-up Postbank Mzansi accounts as their preferred payment method. She added the that the old white Sassa card will be fully phased out by 30 September, and that beneficiaries should swap it for the new gold Sassa card. The new Sassa card is gold in colour and has the country’s coat of arms on the right hand side as well as the letters ‘SASSA’ inscribed on the left. “The Post Office and Sassa have deployed teams throughout the country where dedicated temporary card swap sites are established using existing infrastructure such as municipality halls to expedite the migration to the new card,” she said. “This will ensure that as many people as possible are put onto the new Sassa cards before the end of August. We call on social grants beneficiaries to swap their cards and to not leave it to the last minute,” she said. According to the Post Office it takes approximately three minutes to be issued with a new card once you reach the card issue desk on site. It added that Post Offices nationally will soon also become a card swap channel and the Post Office will issue announcements to social grants beneficiaries once this is possible. “We have seen people being unwittingly persuaded to accept other cards only to realise later that they will be charged all sorts of exorbitant fees. The new gold Sassa card guarantees that you will not be debited with a monthly service fee of R10, or more, or illegal deductions for loans, airtime or electricity,” said Kwele. How it works The new Sassa card operates fully within the national payment system and it has the following benefits for social grants beneficiaries: Three cash withdrawals from any participating merchant (such as Shoprite, Boxer, etc);
One free over the counter cash withdrawal at the Post Office;
Unlimited free swipes (purchase payments) at all merchants;
1 free ATM balance enquiry per month.
The only deduction permitted is for funeral policies, up to no more than 10% of the grant value. “Beneficiaries exercise their method of payment, so that no one is locked in for life. Should any beneficiary wish to change, then all they need to do is to go to a SASSA office or a pay-point as soon as possible with their ID and tell the officials on site that they want the new SASSA gold card,” Kwele said. Read: The best and worst banks in South Africa for digital experience