While the probability of load shedding today is low, Eskom says it it could still be implement if the demand for electricity increases in the evening. “There is a low probability of rotational loadshedding during the day as a result of power station units being returned to the system but the probability of rotational load shedding increases for the evening peak period from 5pm to 9pm due to the normal expected increase in demand,” the power utility said in a statement on Monday (18 June) afternoon. Eskom said should the need for load shedding arise, it would be carried out for four hours. It will also advise if the rotational loadshedding will be conducted in either stage 1, stage 2, stage 3 or stage 4, dependent on the capacity shortage. Stage 1 requires 1,000MW to be rotationally load shed nationwide, stage 2 requires 2,000 MW, stage 3 requires 3,000 MW and stage 4 calls for up to 4,000 MW to be rotationally load shed nationally in that given period, said Eskom. “Loadshedding is conducted as a measure of last resort to protect the power system from a total collapse or blackout,” it said. The power utility said recovery teams at power stations continue to work hard to stabilise the power system and to return the generation plant as quick as possible. “Eskom’s prognosis is that the power system will take up to approximately 10 days to recover from the effects of the recent industrial action, once all staff eventually return to work today. “The estimated 10-day prognosis for full restoration is due to the effects of the industrial action which interrupted continuous processes at the power plants. These processes have now to be cleared out and restarted which would take additional time,” it said. Eskom said the increase in production and full stability can only increase and be achieved with the return of employees on Monday. It will continue to re-assess the prognosis during the week, it said. “We continue to encourage residents and businesses to please use electricity sparingly to ease the demand of electricity. Please switch off geysers during the day especially during peak periods (7 am to 10 am and 6 pm to 9 pm) as well as all non-essential lighting and electricity appliances to assist in reducing demand.” Read: Why it will take Eskom’s grid up to 10 days to recover from strike action