Even if you’re an IT professional (which, if you’re reading this article, you may very well be), it can be daunting seeking an advanced storage solution for your business or home office, as there are so many options available. Direct-attached storage (DAS), a dedicated external storage solution which connects directly to your computer’s server without a network connection, is a popular option for prosumers (videographers, producers, sound technicians etc.) and IT professionals, due to the fact that it’s relatively simple to set up and use, low-maintenance and versatile. In the DAS space, LaCie – a leader in premium and cutting edge storage solutions – has once again pulled out all the stops with its 6big and 12big Thunderbolt 3 drives. These devices allow you to rein in an avalanche of data from super high-res cameras at lightning speeds, safely and efficiently. As an expert in its field, LaCie offers a number of tips and things to consider for those looking for a more professional, capacious DAS storage solution. Speed isn’t a nice-to-have; it’s paramount. Ensure you choose a solution that pulls its weight, as this time saved will become critical when transferring large volumes of data. With up to 1400MB/s and 2600MB/s speeds respectively, LaCie 6big and 12big Thunderbolt 3 are the fastest in their category. When trialling LaCie’s 12big, former CNET editor Dong Ngo admitted that it was the fastest storage device he’d seen. “With this kind of speed, you can finish transferring a Blu-ray disc worth of data (25GB) in less than 20 seconds,” said Ngo. And with this kind of speed, you will slash the time spent on nearly every task in your post-production workflow. Instead of purchasing a new device every time more storage is required, invest in a solution with ample capacity to archive all your files. You’ll also find that improving data access and security will end up saving you money down the line. Available in a wide range of capacities – from a generous 12TB all the way up to a staggering 120TB – LaCie offers a desktop solution to suit every storage need. To maximise space and improve efficiency, divide your storage into multiple volumes according to workflow: one volume for ingesting transcoded clips or current projects, and another for archiving. This way, you will be able to retrieve whatever you need quickly and without hassle. RAID, which stands for “redundant array of independent disks”, is a data storage virtualisation technology that combines multiple physical disk drive components into logical units. Depending on the setup, a RAID configuration can offer faster speeds and more storage space. Ensure that your storage solution supports all the available RAID configurations, as do LaCie’s 6big and 12big. In addition, LaCie’s RAID Manager offers users an intuitive, straightforward interface from which to administer devices. What if you find you need more storage than your DAS allows? Simply link multiple external drives! LaCie Thunderbolt 3 technology lets you daisy chain up to six devices via a single cable. Connecting six LaCie 12big together, for example, would bring a whopping 720TB to your computer! LaCie storage solutions are available from Digicape. Trial Thunderbolt 3 and stand a chance to win a super car test driving experience with LaCie and Digicape. Click here for more information and to enter. This article was published in partnership with Digicape.