The Commission for Employment Equity has released its 18th annual report on transformation – based on information submitted by employers through their annual Employment Equity Reports. During the 2017 employment equity reporting cycle, 27,163 employment equity reports were submitted by designated employers – representing 7,299,428 employees. A large focus of the report was on the differences in demographics between the original report in 2001 and how these have shifted (in both the public and private sector) in 2018. In 2001, designated employers reported that 1% of their total employees were persons with disabilities across all occupational levels of their organisations compared to the 1.3% in 2017 – which is an insignificant increase, the report found In terms of race, the biggest shift was from the white population to the black population in senior management, it said. “The white population at top management level decreased by 20 percentage points, while at senior management level a 24.9 point decrease is noted,” the commission said. “This represents around a 1% increase of the black population year on year, and is considered be a very slow rate of transformation. Again, it should be remembered that the table cannot be considered to be an absolute comparison, as the number of reports received varied and a number of other variables might have impacted on the quality of the reports. At the ‘professionally qualified’ level, there has been a decrease of the white population of 13.8 percentage points, and at the ‘skilled technical’ level their representation increased by 1.6 percentage points, the group said. While these represent positive changes, the commission said that the picture in terms of gender remains particularly discouraging. The highest increase in representation of women is noted at senior management level, which showed an 18.8 point increase. This is a “bleak picture” after 20 years and is far from desirable, it said.  Economically Active Population One of the focuses of the report is the statistical distribution of the national and regional demographics of the economically active population (EAP), The EAP includes people between the ages 15 to 64 years of age who are either employed or unemployed, and who are seeking employment.  Government vs private The report found that at the top management level in the private sector, the representation of the white population group is more than seven times their EAP and in the government sector they are just above their EAP. It also found that in the government sector, the coloured population group representation is closely aligned with their EAP and in the private sector their representation stands at nearly half of their EAP. The private sector also employs about eight times more people from the foreign national population group when compared to the government sector at this occupational level, it said.  Sectors The report found that in  all sectors of the economy, the white population group representation is more than five times their EAP and the African population group representation is more than three times below their EAP at the top management level. In comparison, the Indian population group is more than double their EAP and the coloured population group is below their EAP in all sectors of the economy at this occupational level. Males share the highest proportion of representation.  The full report is embedded below. CEE Annual Report 2018 by BusinessTech on Scribd  Read: These are the changed BEE rules you need to know about – including the new Youth Employment Service