Popular wearables brand Fitbit has announced the availability of Fitbit Ace at major retailers in South Africa for R1,599. Designed for kids ages 8 and older, Ace motivates with customisable step, active minute and sleep goals, celebratory messages and badges, and challenges for the whole family. “Ace is designed to keep pace with kids’ busy lives. With Ace, parents are in control and can manage who their children connect with and what information they see in the Fitbit app that will motivate them most,” the group said, highlighting a product with a showerproof wristband and up to five days battery life. It said that with childhood obesity rates continuing to rise, and two in three kids inactive every day, parents are looking for ways to encourage a more healthy, active lifestyle. According to a Fitbit study, parents cite screen time as an ongoing challenge in getting their kids to be active (58%). Fitbit said it also considered privacy throughout the user experience for both parents and kids and built in safeguards and controls to help ensure a safe and positive experience. Parental consent is required to create an account for kids, and Fitbit’s family account allows parents to approve who their children connect with, and view activity and progress. Parents can help manage what stats their kid sees in the app to only include what motivates them most. Kids have access to appropriate stats for their age, including steps, active minutes and sleep; it won’t highlight calorie intake, weight and body fat/BMI, or public social features. Additional Fitbit Ace features: Tracks activity and sleep: Helps develop healthy habits by tracking steps, active minutes and sleep; goals default to international health guidelines for activity (60 minutes) and sleep (9 hours).
Reminds the user  to move: Reduces sedentary time with personalised reminders to move each hour.
Motivates and rewards the user for moving: Encourages kids to build healthy habits with daily or weekend challenges and collectible badge rewards. Kids (and parents) can see their stats, badges earned, progress toward their goals, and more in the Fitbit app.
Family account: Brings families together and keeps everyone engaged with added motivation and accountability; parents can view their kid’s activity, and manage what stats they see in th app. Fitbit Ace will be available from this week-end in select retailers nationwide.  Read: Fitbit unveils first smartwatch – and wireless headphones