German motoring group Audi has announced its new Q8 – a car that it says will combine the elegance of a four-door luxury coupé with the practical versatility of a large SUV. In a statement released on Tuesday (5 June), Audi said that the SUV coupe will be wider, shorter and lower than its Q7 sister model but will offer a spacious interior that beats its direct competitors in most relevant dimensions. While the manufacturer was relatively quiet on engine details, it did confirm that the Q8 will feature a new mild hybrid technology (MHEV). “The 48-volt primary electrical system incorporates two important technology modules: a lithium-ion battery and a belt alternator starter. During braking, it can recover up to 12 kW of power and feed it back into the battery. The MHEV technology enables long coasting phases with the engine deactivated and a start-stop range that begins at 22 km/h (13.7 mph),” it said. It added that the German Q8 will come standard with a top-of-the-line infotainment system, including a navigation system that recognizes the driver’s preferences based on previous journeys and therefore can make intelligent suggestions. “The optional Audi connect key lets the driver lock/unlock the vehicle, and start the engine using a compatible Android smartphone. Individual user profiles allow as many as 400 preferred settings to be stored for multiple drivers. With the myAudi app, drivers can also transfer special destinations to the navigation system, stream music or transfer the smartphone calendar to the MMI,” it said. The car will also include adaptive cruise assist, efficiency assist, crossing assist, lane change warning, curb warning and 360 degree cameras. “One (other) highlight is the remote garage pilot, which will follow in early 2019. Under the supervision of the driver, it guides the SUV into a garage and back out again autonomously,” Audi said. “The driver gets out of the car beforehand and activates the process using the myAudi app on their smartphone.The (remote) parking pilot offers a similar level of convenience. Behind all of these features is the central driver assistance controller. “It continuously computes a differentiated model of the surroundings and uses this to manage the assistance systems. The required data are obtained – depending on the selected options – from up to five radar sensors, six cameras, twelve ultrasound sensors and the laser,” it said. Audi said that the Q8 will launch on the European market in the third quarter of 2018. Local availability has not yet been confirmed.    Read: These are the most popular cars in South Africa right now