A number of recent incidents have once again brought the issue of offensive speech in the workplace to the fore. However, the issue has popped up in a number of cases over the last few years, with a recent Constitutional Court case setting out the test for when language can be seen as racist and derogatory, and whether it constitutes dismissal. According to Victor Mndebele, senior associate at ENSAfrica, in Rustenburg Platinum Mine and SAEWA obo Meyer Bester and Other the Constitutional Court dealt with the question of whether an employee referring to a colleague as a “swart man” (“black man”) constituted misconduct, justifying dismissal. The Constitutional Court case came from an issue around allocated parking at the Rustenburg Platinum Mine, where a white employee was allocated a parking bay next to a black sub-contractor at the mine. Concerned about the similar sizes of the cars that needed to park next to each other, the employee appealed to the manager to make arrangements for the sub-contractor to park elsewhere. The matter was taken to the CCMA after the employee allegedly stormed into a meeting held by the manager, demanding that he must “remove that black man’s vehicle”. The employee alleged that the manager tried to make it a racial issue by saying that he (the employee) does not “want to park next to a black man…this is your problem”. The CCMA accepted that the employee had the terms “black man”, but came to the conclusion that the term had been used in a descriptive sense rather than a derogatory sense. On review, however, the Labour Court set aside the CCMA’s finding. It accepted the version of events described by the employer’s witnesses and came to the conclusion that the remark had had racist connotations. The issue eventually led to the Constitutional Court. Constitutional Court In considering the case, the Constitutional Court had to first determine whether the use of the term “black man” was racist and derogatory, Mndebele explained. The Constitutional Court found that: In interpreting “black man”, the reality of South Africa’s past of institutionally entrenched racism cannot be ignored. Therefore, the starting point for interpreting the use of “black man” cannot be presumed to be from a neutral context.
The term “black man” was racially loaded, and hence, derogatorily subordinating. In particular, the Constitutional Court held that: The Constitutional Court went on to hold that: The Constitutional Court found that (the employee) had shown no remorse. He had steadfastly denied ever using the term “black man”. In denying ever using the term, the employee was dishonest. Such dishonesty weighed heavily against him when considering sanction, said Mndebele. “In finding that dismissal was the appropriate sanction, the Constitutional Court found that by his actions he has shown that he has not made a break with the apartheid past and embraced the new democratic order where the principles of equality, justice and non-racialism reign supreme. “The Constitutional Court found that the test to be applied in determining whether the term “black man” was racist and derogatory is whether “objectively, the words were reasonably capable of conveying to the reasonable hearer that the phrase had a racist meaning,” Mndebele said. Read: Name changes on the cards for “offensive” streets in the Western Cape