Airbnb recently published data on the growing popularity of the home sharing app in South Africa. According to the data, South Africa welcomed nearly 830,000 inbound guests in 2017, and 551,000 outbound guests travelled from South Africa to other destinations, creating over a million connections across the world. These incoming guests also brought money with them, and the data shows that the typical South African host earned R24,633 renting out their space for an average of 17 nights. Cape Town, by some margin, attracted the most Airbnb visitors, with 350,000 guest arrivals last year, followed by Johannesburg (60,000), and Durban, with 40,000 arrivals. Due to the stagnant economy, and rising living costs, South Africans are ever increasingly looking for supplementary income. As such, the app has attracted a number of quirky, yet charming local listings. BusinessTech has selected five listings which stand out from the crowd: Shik Shack Backpackers R500 per night
Hoedspruit, Limpopo What they said: ‘A completely eco friendly, off the grid property located just 15 minutes from Kruger National Park.’    Central Drakensberg Rockwood Cave R900 per night
Estcourt What they said: ‘Open plan rock cave with kitchenette, queen bed and private shower and toilet. Everything you need to make you comfortable, just bring your own food n drinks etc.’      Castle in Clarens R3,000 per night
Clarens What they said: ‘Nestled in the heart of the Maluti Mountains, Castle in Clarens lets everybody experience the grandeur of castle living. Experience the magic, in this self-catering guesthouse or meals on request.’     Lighthouse “Relay (Situations Space Program)” R750
Johannesburg What they said: ‘Spend the night/week in the heart of the Maboneng Precinct, a vibrant neighbourhood on the east side of Johannesburg inner-city. The light house forms part of Curiocity Backpackers and is located on top of The Main Change Building, a former industrial building reconverted into offices, retail and cultural spaces.’     Jackie O – Classic Luxury Yacht & Boutique Hotel R20,000 per night
Cape Town What they said: ‘Luxury classic motor yacht with 4 spacious ensuite bedrooms, ( 2 double rooms & 2 twin rooms ) lounge and bar area , gourmet kitchen and dining / conference room.’     Read: How much Airbnb hosts earn in Joburg vs Cape Town vs Durban