Apple co-founder Steve Wozniak spoke to CNBC about the future of Bitcoin, saying he hopes it will become the single global currency. Wozniak was speaking to CNBC at the Money20/20 conference on Monday. “I believe super strongly in mathematics and purity and science as defining the world,” he said, adding that Bitcoin is tied to those ideals – and is surviving. “Bitcoin is mathematically defined; there is a certain quantity of Bitcoin; there’s a way it’s distributed… and it’s pure and there’s no human running, there’s no company running and it’s just… growing and growing… and surviving, that to me says something that is natural – and nature is more important than all our human conventions,” he said. Bitcoin traded at around $7,410 on Tuesday, having reached an all-time high just shy of $20,000 six months ago. Bitcoin transactions have reportedly slipped to around 200,000 per day, down from a peak of around 400,000 in December. Wozniak said he initially bought Bitcoin (at $700) to experiment on how to ‘buy things online’.  “So I sold off all my Bitcoin except one, which I kept to experiment with now. And I have two Ether (the payment token of the the Ethereum network).” “I am not an investor, that was not my purpose at all,” Wozniak said. He said that Ethereum is a platform. “Only Bitcoin is pure digital gold…that’s the phrase that’s used and I totally buy into that. All of the others tend to give up some of the aspects of Bitcoin. How is the math on Bitcoin so correct that it still works.” Twitter founder and CEO Jack Dorsey recently said he expects to see Bitcoin adopted as global means of payment. “I buy into what Jack Dorsey says – not that I necessarily believe it’s going to happen, but because I want it to be that way, that is so pure thinking,” Wozniak told CNBC . He said that cryptocurrencies will achieve their full potential in a decade. A contrasting view Meanwhile, short seller Jim Chanos, who predicted the fall of Enron Corp, said of Bitcoin: “It will fail in a crisis”. Read: Bitcoin could fall to $2,800 by the end of the year: analyst