Online property start-up Property Fox has published a new report on feeder suburbs across South Africa’s major metros. The report attempts to make life a little bit easier for parents to find which areas and primary schools will give them the best chance to get their children into the top secondary schools. While many schools do not have explicit entry requirements, many have specific feeder zones or feeder schools which limit accessibility for anyone who is found outside of them. Further, preference is also typically given based on family who already attend schools, academic or sport performance, and other similar criteria. “One of the questions PropertyFox gets asked most by property buyers is, ‘is that house in the feeder zone of x, y, z school’? To assist buyers with better decision making, we decided to find out,” Property Fox said. “We have compiled this guide to South African school feeder zones – aka ‘catchment areas’ – to help parents choose the right address for their school of choice.” The report looks at 66 of the top performing high schools in South Africa, based on matric results, and assumes that these are the most attractive schools to parents. It also bases its findings on prospective homeowners who are looking for a R1.5 million house. Western Cape schools The Western Cape Education Department has not determined any feeder zones for public schools in the Western Cape. However, research shows many schools give preference to learners in specified feeder zones as set by individual school governing bodies. Property Fox identified 27 top schools in the greater Cape Town Metro area. The top schools were identified as those that have attained a 100% matric pass rate since 2013 and an 80% bachelor entry pass rate. They have also been recognised for sporting achievements, and are in major metro areas. These are the suburbs that feed the following schools (click on images to enlarge). Metro Central  Metro South  Metro North and East  Multiple Read: Where you need to live to get your kids into Joburg and Pretoria’s top schools