The UK Government has announced changes to its immigration rules that will come into effect on 6 July 2018. According to emigration consultants Breytenbachs, some of the changes will bring very welcome news to persons looking to work and live in the the country. Below it outlined three of the biggest changes that you need to know about. Tier 2 skilled visa cap Doctors and nurses will be removed from the Tier 2 Skilled Worker Visa cap. This step will not only benefit the doctors and nurses but will open up spaces on for other skilled workers to come and work in the UK. “Hundreds of places will be freed every month for other skilled workers applying for the restricted Certificates of Sponsorship, including; engineers, IT professionals, teachers and others,” Breytenbachs said. “The annual quota for Tier 2 Restricted Certificates of Sponsorship is 20,700. The unrestricted Certificates of Sponsorship do not have an annual cap.” Every month some Tier 2 restricted certificates of sponsorship are allocated. If the demand for CoS is more than the Home Office have available then applications that score, the least number of points will be rejected and have to reapply for the consideration the following month, it said. “Where there are not sufficient numbers of CoS available to meet demand, the Home Office uses a point-scoring system to determine which CoS to issue. “This system prioritises applications that are on the Shortage Occupation List, Ph.D. level positions, and graduate roles recruited through milk round. After that, applications for positions with higher salaries attached to them will score more points than those with lower salaries attached.” New form of leave for children The UK Government will create a new form of leave for children under section 67 of the Immigration Act 2016. This new form of leave will ensure that children who do not qualify for refugee or humanitarian protection leave will still be able to stay in the UK long term. They will be able to study, work, have access to public funds and healthcare, and apply for settlement after five years. Exceptional Talent visa for those in the Arts The Tier 1 Exceptional Talent visa will henceforth be open to leading fashion designers. The British Fashion Council will assess their applications, under the endorsement remit of the Arts Council of England (ACE). The Tier 1 Exceptional Talent route has also opened up to a wider pool of TV and film applicants, Breytenbachs said. Currently the Exceptional Talent visa allows you to stay in the UK for five years, after which, if you qualify, you can apply for indefinite leave to remain (ILR). In addition to the above, some of the current qualifying jobs include: Science Active researchers in a relevant scientific field and have a PhD or equivalent research experience Engineering Mechanical engineering
Process engineering
Civil engineering
Biomedical engineering
Innovation and policy engineering
Electrical engineering
Information communication technology engineering Humanities and social science Philosophy
Anthropology and geography
Economics
Sociology
Psychology
Political studies
Law Medicine Anatomy
Clinical medicine
Biochemistry
Anyone who demonstrates exceptional promise in their respective field, or those who have already exhibited exceptional talent through research or innovation in the medical field Digital technology Programmers
Developers
Anyone involved in the business of digital technology The arts Dance
Music
Theatre
Visual arts (including museums and galleries)
Literature
Combined arts
Any person whose work has been published, performed, presented, distributed or exhibited internationally and you are able to provide evidence thereof Read:  The 5 most popular countries for South Africans to buy citizenship and emigrate to