Online property start-up Property Fox has published a new report on feeder suburbs across South Africa’s major metros. The report attempts to make life a little bit easier for parents to find which areas and primary schools will give them the best chance to get their children into the top secondary schools. While many schools do not have explicit entry requirements, many have specific feeder zones or feeder schools which limit accessibility for anyone who is found outside of them. Further, preference is also typically given based on family who already attend schools, academic or sport performance, and other similar criteria. “One of the questions PropertyFox gets asked most by property buyers is, ‘is that house in the feeder zone of x, y, z school’? To assist buyers with better decision making, we decided to find out,” Property Fox said. “We have compiled this guide to South African school feeder zones – aka ‘catchment areas’ – to help parents choose the right address for their school of choice.” The report looks at 66 of the top performing high schools in South Africa, based on matric results, and assumes that these are the most attractive schools to parents. It also bases its findings on prospective homeowners who are looking for a R1.5 million house. Gauteng schools Gauteng’s regional policy on school catchment is that a default 5 km radius applies in 2018. Recent 2019 provincial legislature now says that preference will be given to learners with guardians whose home/work address is in the feeder zone, siblings, and pupils from primary schools closest to high schools in the area. In Gauteng, Property Fox identified 30 top schools from across the province, including areas like Sandton, Centurion and Pretoria. The top schools were identified as those that have attained a 100% matric pass rate since 2013 and an 80% bachelor entry pass rate. They have also been recognised for sporting achievements, and are in major metro areas. These are the suburbs that feed the following schools (click on images to enlarge). Tshwane South  Johannesburg Central  Johannesburg East  Johannesburg North  Ekurhuleni  Multiple Locations Read: SA school textbooks to be rewritten in new history curriculum