The world’s 50 best restaurants for 2018 have been announced, following an awards ceremony at the Guggenheim Museum in Spain. The list is published by the British magazine, Restaurant, and is based on a poll of international chefs, restaurateurs, gourmands and restaurant critics. The top restaurants are often considered to be forerunners of molecular gastronomy, and most of the restaurants on the serve haute cuisine – which is characterised by the meticulous preparation and careful presentation of food. After placing second in 2017, Osteria Francescana, based in Modena, Italy, picked up the gong for 2018. Lead by famous head chef Massimo Bottura, the kitchen’s creations are heavily influenced by art and music (in particular, jazz), and the dining space is made up of three elegant rooms that are adorned with high-quality contemporary artwork. The rest of the top 10 features restaurants in countries across the world – including ‘Eleven Madison Park’ in New York, and ‘Maido’ in Lima,Peru. Top 10 South Africa’s Test Kitchen  One South African restaurant featured on the list, with Cape Town’s The Test Kitchen, placing at number 50. According to the ranking, the restaurant stands out as the first fine dining restaurant to open in Cape Town’s gentrified Woodstock –  kicking off an artistic boom. The food is based on  popular global dishes with South African ingredients and twists, and chef Luke Dale-Roberts’s restaurant has two intimate dining areas – one “dark”, one “light”. Typical dishes include distinctive small bites from around the world like ceviche and roti paired with cocktails in the quiet dark room. More classic-mod fare is served in the buzzy light room – like eland carpaccio, local Kingklip smoked with curry leaves and scallops with a Cape Malay sabayon. With the ongoing drought in the region, The Test Kitchen announced major changes to its menu and operations in February. The restaurant implemented several water saving measures throughout its operations, including using melted ice bucket water for cleaning the floors, and fitting water saving taps. Chef Dale Roberts also designed a menu that uses minimal water to prepare. To do this, he’s reduced the amount of blanching, stocks and sauces required to produce his dishes. In addition to this, diners at the Drought Kitchen – a pop-up dining experience within The Test Kitchen using less water – had their food served to them in a wooden frame, on compostable cardboard that is slipped out between courses. Read: This ‘young’ South African university is among the top 100 in the world