The International Monetary Fund (IMF) has released a new report on South Africa, highlighting where the country is succeeding, as well as points of concern. This after an IMF team led by Ana Lucía Coronel visited South Africa from 28 May – 11 June, to conduct its regular Article IV surveillance activities. Discussions focused on measures and reforms to reignite growth and reduce poverty and inequality. “South Africa’s potential is significant, yet growth over the past five years has not benefitted from the global recovery,” it said. “The economy is globally positioned, sophisticated, and diversified, and several sectors—agribusiness, mining, manufacturing, and services—have capacity for expansion. “Combined with strong institutions and a young workforce, opportunities are vast. However, several constraints have held growth back. “Policy uncertainty and a regulatory environment not conducive to private investment have resulted in GDP growth rates that have not kept up with those of population growth, reducing income per capita, and hurting disproportionately the poor,” it said. It further noted that the projected growth rate of 1.5% was still insufficient to make a meaningful dent in unemployment, poverty, and inequality. however it added that growth is unlikely to exceed 2% over the medium term. Reforms The report does praise a number reform efforts introduced since president Cyril Ramaphosa took office at the start of the year. These include new measure adopted to tackle corruption, such as changes in boards and/or management of major state-owned enterprises (SOEs), an inquiry into tax administration, actions to strengthen procurement, the signing of contracts with independent power producers, and in general, the intention to eliminate wasteful expenditure. While the group said that these reforms are welcome, it cautioned that it’s not enough. To durably improve growth and lift people out of poverty, these actions need to be followed by strict enforcement of good regulations, such as the Public Financial Management Act, and the implementation of a broad set of reforms, it said. What needs to change According to the IMF, materially turning the economy around toward strong and inclusive growth will require swift implementation of a bold reform agenda. “Reforms in product and labor markets must span all sectors of the economy, and implementation carried out expeditiously,” it said. The group said that ‘quick win’ reforms should be implemented right away so that the economy could benefit from them sooner rather than later – while wider-reaching reforms (which will take some time), should be initiated as soon as possible. Notably, the IMF said that the introduction of the national minimum wage has the potential to benefit workers – but its impact should be carefully monitored, and complementary measures envisaged if undue effects on youth employment and small- and medium-sized enterprises ensue. The finance body also said that clarity was needed around land reform. Ten proposed changes include: Read: These 2 events could make or break the rand this week: analyst