FNB has launched innovative, customer-driven digital solutions on it’s the FNB app, making banking easier, paperless, and queue-free. As a leader in banking innovation, FNB’s fully-integrated digital platform can be used on many devices, offering personalised products and solutions at the push of a button. The FNB app meets the needs of both individual and business customers and delivers a seamless, advanced account opening process that makes switching accounts easier. The FNB app also features smart self-service solutions, digital money management options to improve financial health, and credit card functionality that allows customers to courier and track card delivery on the FNB app. The new features available on the latest version of the FNB app are listed below. Customers can now open an account within minutes by taking a selfie in the FNB app, with identity verification done through the Department of Home Affairs. This allows for frictionless onboarding through biometric facial verification on the FNB app. Users can also order and schedule courier delivery of new bank cards, switch debit orders, and set up digital banking immediately using the in-app messaging system and calendar to select a date and time for their card to be delivered. All verification using the system is paperless, removing the need for proof of address and ID document scans. Another new feature is nav» Money, which allows customers to better manage their monthly spend – from tracking upcoming payments, to monitoring their overall income and expenses. Users can access an updated view of their financial health based on three simple views: Track my spend – This lets customers know whether they are spending more than they are earning and provides spend tips to manage their cash flow better.
My available funds – This lets customers know what’s left to save and spend after all known upcoming payments. FNB takes all scheduled payments and debit orders into consideration. If users experience a shortfall, they can access other funds available like eBucks, savings, and credit – all in one place.
My credit status – FNB assess various data, including internal information and credit bureau records, to rate a customer’s credit fitness across seven helpful indicators. Users learn what they’re doing right, and where they could improve, with personalised tips on late payments, credit limit usage, track record, and more. eBucks Travel, which will be available soon, will incorporate a fully-fledged travel solution that allows FNB customers to book a flight, hire a car, book airport transfers with Avis P2P, access the Slow Lounge, and more. Users will be able to compare flights across multiple airlines and pay using eBucks, their FNB card, or a combination of both. They will also be able to create profiles for friends and family they often travel with to avoid needing to remember and repeatedly fill in those details. Customers will be able to make seamless, secure payments without the need to enter card details or a one-time pin (OTP) through FNB Pay on the FNB banking app, minimising the risk of phishing. As part of an ongoing strategy of personalising rewards based on a customer’s unique banking behaviour, eBucks Rewards will also launch FNB Offers. This will be a rewards programme with instantly-redeemable eBucks or discounted partner vouchers for performing everyday banking tasks. FNB will also launch more payment options tailored to suit customer needs. These include: FNB Pay QR code – This will allow businesses and retail customers to scan a QR code and make a payment directly from their FNB profile.
FNB Pay Checkout – This will allow customers to make contactless payments at contactless-enabled point-of-sale (POS) terminals.
Wearable payment options – This will allow customers to purchase products by tapping a compatible wearable device on a payment point after setting it up in the FNB app. “These evolving and innovative digital solutions have been introduced as a result of our continuous assessment of our customers’ needs, and our drive to adapt their services to meet these needs,” states FNB. “Our main objective was to offer an evolving, fully-integrated digital banking platform that fits seamlessly into the lives of customers, making their banking easier.” For more information, visit the FNB website. This article was published in partnership with FNB.