The duty of directors to act in the best interest of the company has traditionally been to maximise profits for the company’s shareholders. Over time, however, public opinion has dictated that a variety of other stakeholders’ interests should also be recognised. So, can the directors of these companies be held personally liable by the South African public as ultimate stakeholders? And, what exactly are the duties of directors of state owned companies (SOCs), asks Nastascha Harduth, director at Werksmans attorneys. The second question must be considered, before the first can be answered, Harduth said. In this regard, principle 16 in King IV provides that ‘In the execution of its governance role and responsibilities, the governing body should adopt a stakeholder-inclusive approach that balances the needs, interests and expectations of material stakeholders in the best interests of the organisation over time’. The stakeholder inclusive approach advocated by King IV is that: This approach in King IV seems to echo emerging case law on corporate governance. “We must, of course, also consider the Companies Act 71 of 2008. Section 5(1) of this Act states that the Act must be interpreted in such a way that gives best effect to the purposes listed in section 7. Section 7(d) specifically provides that directors have to manage a company in such a manner that promotes both economic and social benefits, and 7(k) provides for the efficient rescue and recovery of financially distressed companies, in a manner that balances the rights and interests of all relevant stakeholders. “Therefore, it is incumbent on directors to not only act in the best interests of the company’s shareholders, but also in the best interest of all its stakeholders,” Harduth said. “There is no doubt in my mind that this is especially true for state owned companies. And, in failing to act in the best interest of both shareholders and other stakeholders alike, personal liability for losses and/or damages incurred by stakeholders are sure to follow as night follows day,” the legal expert said. “However, the burning question is whether or not any one or group of stakeholders have suffered enough harm as a direct result of the directors’ failure to act with due care and skill, that would justify the time and expense of travelling down this very rocky road. “Given the state of South Africa’s SOCs, it seems more likely than ever before,” Harduth said. Read: Restraint of trade – what you need to know