Enterprises today are directly connected to the internet, and it’s becoming critical to deploy next-generation security strategies and multi-path WAN to improve application performance. Fortinet Secure SD-WAN offers a simplified configuration – connecting enterprise networks from branch offices to data centres. Unlike legacy WAN architectures, Fortinet’s software-defined WAN is designed to fit perfectly with cloud-based applications – giving organisations greater agility and efficiency as they handle exponential traffic growth. With Fortinet SD-WAN, companies can use up to three different cloud providers, and get close to 10-times the bandwidth at half the cost of legacy WAN architectures, while having redundancy. While companies might think that having a device that features SD-WAN offers great features, many companies don’t consider how secure their traffic flows are from a branch to a data centre. These old traffic flows are pulled through a central security solution from the data centre, and out to the internet where unified threat management or next-generation firewalling takes place. With Fortinet Secure SD-WAN, however, every site breaks out to the internet directly, with tunnels linked to the data centre without using MPLS and has a centrally managed policy for governance. Furthermore, by moving data storage to the cloud, data centres are no longer on-site, and there is no MPLS connection from the branch to the cloud. This means a company’s security policy should have a single-pane view across the entire organisation, and requires SD-WAN configuration. An SD-WAN solution has to be efficient, easy to configure, and provide visibility – without it, nothing can be secured. Fortinet’s feature-set is aimed at ensuring Fortinet’s SD-WAN solution is secure, and that data is protected thanks to the IPSEC tunnels they use, and the cloud firewall infrastructure incorporated into a single-pane view. With Fortinet SD-WAN, all the gates and other devices in the growing cloud ecosystem are connected, and companies no longer need to leverage a service from just one of cloud vendor – whether it is Amazon Web Services (AWS), Google, Microsoft Azure, or a different cloud provider. Developers also often want to divide Applications for different business requirements, such as customer-facing or branch applications, while having the branches connected to all other sites. Fortinet’s secure SD-WAN solution offers the capability to send traffic to the AWS and Azure nodes and is designed to meet these needs efficiently. “Fortinet Secure SD-WAN is far simpler than other providers, because we have everything in one platform,” said John Ward, Fortinet Systems Engineering Manager. Fortinet’s FortiGate enterprise firewall provides high-performance, consolidated advanced security and granular visibility for broad protection across the entire digital attack surface. “Users can also simply enable Fortigate’s features on their graphical user interface, eliminating extra licencing costs,” said Ward. “And because many organisations already have FortiGate implemented, they benefit from not having to learn anything new when enabling the system.” Unlike other SD-WAN solutions, users do not need to buy an additional security device to secure their traffic. This translates into a lower total cost of ownership for businesses and faster turnaround times. “At the pace at which technology is developing, users will need a network which is flexible and can be dynamically configured,” said Ward. When it comes to auditing and risk management, Fortinet offers dashboards that provide on-the-spot risk analysis of the firewall security without any requirement for third-party tools. The average SD-WAN deployment consists of an on-site device from Fortinet, which encompasses up to three methods of bandwidth deployment. Users can deploy bandwidth from two different providers and get a third connection from Fortinet, such as the FortiExtender Wireless LAN, which provides a manageable 3G and 4G connection. This allows Fortinet to send traffic down many links, unlike other providers of SD-WAN that are limited to a single link, failing over to a second link, and then to a 3G connection was as an additional failover. “With Fortinet secure SD-WAN there’s no chaining of connections for link failovers, and there’s no additional infrastructure required, as it provides built-in redundancy,” said Ward. Companies will also see a quick change in ROI as they can eliminate extra costs incurred from multiple megabits of MPLS bandwidth, and the multiple links ensure that the SLA is better – as the company can use all links at the same time. “Companies need to be able to use the things they have, and that’s what we’re putting on the table,” said Ward. Fortinet’s secure SD-WAN sets them apart from other providers, as they have a rich feature-set in their SD-WAN. They also pride themselves in having the Gartner Magic Quadrant security features in their secure SD-WAN together with other features. “We have been a top-rated vendor in the Gartner Magic Quadrant for next-gen firewalling, web-applications, unified threat management, and even enterprise space,” said Ward. “We also have had the richness of the networking features in our stack, and we were allowing customers to do things like link load-balancing even before the term SD-WAN came to the fore.” For secure SD-WAN, Fortinet is the market leader, he added. “This is simply because we already have all those features in a mature product and because we also have quality of service in the stack.” Fortinet Secure SD-WAN is a cost-efficient, all-in-one box solution, that provides customers and partners with a single-pane view for management and information. For more information, visit the Fortinet website. This article was published in partnership with Fortinet.