LTE-A group, Rain has launched new promotional unlimited mobile data deals. The deals mark the commercial launch of Rain’s mobile data offering, following the group’s focus on rolling out base stations to service its LTE-A network over the past year. Rain is 20% owned by billionaire Patrice Motsepe’s African Rainbow Capital Investments (ARC), which acquired its stake in the group mid-2017. Former FNB CEO, Michael Jordaan is also a director and shareholder of Rain. In a statement released on Wednesday (6 June), the company said that its mobile network will focus solely on data offerings, significantly reducing the price for SA consumers to connect to the internet. “Rain offers consumers one plan: mobile data priced at 5c per meg (R50 per gig). Customers will only pay for data they have used at the end of a month,” it said. “There are no contracts lock-ins, no bundles and no regular monthly fees. Data will never expire and customers will never have to pay expensive out-of-bundle rates. At any time, a Rain customer will be able to set and manage their SIM’s spend-limit, ensuring that they never experience bill-shock.” After joining online at Rain.co.za, a Rain SIM will be delivered straight to a client’s door, it said. As part of a launch promotion, new customers will be able to experience unlimited data usage on Rain’s high-speed 4G network for free, for 15 days after joining. These free unlimited data days will be a risk-free way for consumers to experience the network and test their individual coverage needs, it said. Rain’s offering is data-only and does not provide traditional voice services. However, the group said that customers will be able to activate data-based services such as WhatsApp, Facebook Messenger and Skype on their phones and make calls to other users on the same services. Data-hungry consumers will also have to option to add unlimited off-peak data for R250 per month to their Rain one plan. This will award them unlimited data usage for 19 hours a day, except at peak times (18h00 to 23h00). During peak hours, consumers will pay the standard 5c per meg (R50 per gig). You can find more about the deals on offer as well as the coverage available on Rain’s website here.  Read: Africa’s fastest growing economy is inviting big business to cash in – with MTN and Vodacom likely key players