A recent viral video showed South African traffic officers stopping and fining cars which didn’t come to a ‘complete stop’ at a stop-street intersection. While the motorist in the video managed to escape with a ‘warning’ after indicating to the officers that he was filming on his dashcam, many viewers questioned what would happen if they were not filming. Speaking to BusinessTech, DashcamSA said that incidents such as these had lead to annual increases in the interest and purchasing of dashcams in South Africa. “Besides corporates wanting to ensure their vehicles are fitted with dashcams for added insurance purposes, more everyday private road users are starting to see the benefit of having a dashboard camera for their daily commute,” it said. However it added that the demand was not only due to dodgy traffic offices, but a number of other incidents meant that they had become a necessity for all South African road users. These include: unlicensed bad drivers
unroadworthy vehicles
illegal traffic stops or roadblocks
individuals posing as traffic officers
corrupt traffic officials
drunk drivers
road rage incidents
motorists that  continue to text & drive  How much they cost According to DashcamSA, a good quality dashcam should not cost you less than R1,600. It added that a 32GB micro SD card class 10 is required for most dashcams, and that a professional company should offer you both. “Most dashcams are DIY install and you just use your existing cigarette port to keep the dashcam charged throughout your journey. For corporate fleets wiring of the dashcam to the fuse or alternative power source in the vehicle is recommended,” it said. “For company delivery vehicles, a good dual view dashcam is recommended, this is able to see the driver inside the vehicle & the view of the road ahead. Speed tracking & GPS co-ordinates are added benefits on some units.” For everyday motorists DashcamSA reccomended a mirror dashcam as they fit onto all existing vehicle mirrors and the dashcam does not interfere with their view of the windshield in any way. “Unfortunately many fake branded dashboard cameras are flooding our markets and are not truthful about the products capabilities,” it said. Below it set out the following tips when buying a dashcam in South Africa: Have you researched online first before impulse buying at a retail outlet for convenience?
How long do you want your dashcam to last?  Quality chipsets cost money.
Are you being charged more for the pretty box in the store than what’s inside the camera?
Remember it’s not what the dashcam looks like on the outside, but rather the quality of chipsets on the inside.
The quality on the pretty box says 1080P HD. Can you view the footage online? If not return to tip number one.
Dashcams don’t have to have name brands, instead after- sale service from a reputable company is more important.
Be aware of lookalikes. Read: Are dashcams actually legal in South Africa?