CareerCast has identified 10 of the best jobs in today’s “gig economy” as a guide for independent workers seeking employment. Among the best jobs for gig workers are: Accountant, Application Software Developer, Carpenter, Management Analyst, Marketing Manager, Multimedia Artist, Occupational Therapist, Plumber, Public Relations Specialist and Web Developer. “The ability to work with clients on a temporary flexible basis makes the prospect of taking on contract employment attractive for those with the motivation and means to seek out opportunities,” said Kyle Kensing, online content editor at CareerCast. “Self-employment could approach as much as one-third of the employment landscape in the United States by 2020.” Opportunities for those seeking just such an employment path cover a wide range of industries and jobs. Since so much of marketing and media have moved online, Marketing Managers and Public Relations Specialists can contract their services out to a variety of clients without physical location placing limitations. The location of the product itself has gone digital, so collaborating with employers over email, Skype, Facetime, etc, is nothing out of the ordinary. The same holds true for tech jobs like Web and Application Software Developer, and tech-adjacent fields such as Multimedia Artist. Intrepid professionals have the opportunity now to provide their services to as many, or as few, clients as they chose. Not only are there careers that benefit from the growth of and improvement in telecommunications, making the possibility of remote work a reality, but fields that were promising for alternative employment two decades ago can be even more attractive today. The findings published by the BLS in June 2018 report Construction as one of the leading sectors hiring alternative employees, and specialised skill-trade workers in construction niches are in high-demand. Shortages for licensed Carpenters and Plumbers equate to abundant job prospects, and the chance to demand higher pay. Though the nature of work is much different, the willingness and ability to move from site to site on a contractual basis can also provide a career path for Occupational Therapists. Schools, non-profit organisations that work with children and other organisations will often hire Occupational Therapists on contract for certain days and hours of the week, as opposed to full-time employment. A similar approach works in the corporate world, too, where Management Analysts can work with organisations on an as needed-basis to help improve managerial practices. Read: South Africa’s top 10 richest business executives