Toyota South Africa has officially announced its revamped Toyota 86. Toyota also confirmed that its 86 line-up been revised to consist of a single derivative based on the High grade 6-speed manual specification package. The previously offered ‘standard grade’ and automatic transmission equipped ‘high grade’ models have thus been discontinued from the local line-up, it said. The tailoring also includes the addition of a GT86 badge and change of name to ‘GT86’. Toyota SA said that the GT86 will start at R575,700 in South Africa. Changes Visual changes include a black treatment to the rear spoiler and side mirrors, while new black hued 17-inch alloy wheel complete the black-out theme. Internally Toyota has added a Brembo performance brake package which increases the 86’s stopping power and brake endurance with bigger rotors and callipers. Toyota has also included the Sachs performance dampers which boost handling stability and responsiveness. An all-coil suspension consists of MacPherson struts at the front and double wishbones at the rear, both with a stabiliser bar. Full LED lighting elements (headlights, taillights and fog lamps), keyless entry, dual-zone climate control, seat heating, Alcantara seat -and door trim and TFT multi-information display with digital gauge read out, come as standard. A newly fitted touchscreen infotainment system occupies the dashboard – complete with Apple CarPlay and Android Auto Show Plus functionality. This allows users to ‘mirror’ apps on their smartphone and stream both music – and navigation services from apps such as Spotify, Apple Music and Waze, to the vehicle’s audio screen. In addition, on-board satellite navigation is included as standard. The system also offers Bluetooth telephony and USB interface – all accessible from the steering-mounted switchgear. The model retains its 2.0 litre D-4S Boxer engine delivering 147 kW @ 7000 rpm and 205 Nm at 6400 – 6600 rpm. The GT86 comes with a 4 year/60,000 kilometre service plan and 3 year/100,000 kilometre Warranty. Customers have the option of upgrading either the service or warranty plans through Toyota Value Service.  Read: Toyota invests $500 million in Uber to get self-driving cars on the road