South African National Parks (SANParks) has announced plans to form a public-private partnership under which it will grant a selected private operator the right to operate and manage the Skukuza Safari Lodge in the Kruger National Park (KNP). In a statement released on Friday, SANParks invited prospective operators to submit detailed bids for the management of the lodge. It added that a due diligence site visit will be arranged for the 29 August 2018 to provide interested parties the opportunity to ascertain all information required to present informed bids. In addition it noted that the operator must be a level one contributor according to the provisions of the Amended Tourism B-BBEE Code. First announced in early 2017, the Skukuza Safari Lodge is aimed at to upscaling and increasing visitor accommodation and opportunity within the iconic Kruger National Park. Upon completion in the final quarter of 2018, the 3-star hotel and conference facility will be able to accommodate about 250 tourists per night, running at full capacity. The full development cost of the conference lodge (lodge, bulk services and staff housing) is expected to amount to R269.5 million, and will be funded from the Infrastructure Development Grant. Other developments As part of the announcement, SANParks also announced three other ‘investment opportunities’ at Letaba, Phalaborwa and Phabeni. Letaba concession SANParks intends to award a new concession of approximately 15,000 hectares south of the Letaba River on the western boundary of the KNP. The Private Party will be permitted to develop a lodge of 50 guest beds and 30 staff beds. Certain activities will be allowed on the concession area and could include equestrian activities. The term will be 25 years and will require equity participation by successful land claimants. Phalaborwa lodge SANParks intends to award a new concession that consists of a 100-room (200-bed) safari lodge just north of Phalaborwa Gate within the boundaries of the KNP. The term will be 25 years and will require equity participation by successful land claimants. Phabeni education centre SANParks intends to award a concession to manage and operate the education centre located at Phabeni Gate within the boundaries of the KNP. The term will be 10 years and will require equity participation by successful land claimants. Read: Rosebank’s new tallest building has a sky garden – with apartments starting at R2 million