The African National Congress has raised concerns about the negative impact that the high cost of data services has on ordinary South Africans – especially workers, youth, students and women. In a statement released on Friday (10 August), the ANC said that as a result of the high costs of data, the majority of people are unable to enjoy the benefits of the digital economy in South Africa. It further stifles the growth and development of small businesses, the party added. “The ANC believes that lowering the cost of data will be a catalyst for economic growth. It will unlock economic opportunities and thus contribute to economic growth and job creation. “The ANC encourages government to take urgent steps to ensure full implementation of all policies and regulations in support of the #DataMustFall campaign, working together with the Regulator (ICASA) and all mobile operators in our country. ” It noted that while it was encouraged that some operators have taken the first step to lower data prices, not enough was being down. “The mobile operators must demonstrate goodwill and lower data prices and allow government to resolve the allocation of new spectrum. “The release of spectrum international mobile telecommunications services (IMT-Advance) is expected to also resolve most of the constraints experienced by mobile operators and also accelerate the roll-out of broadband networks in rural areas, particularly the wholesale Wireless Open Access Network (WOAN) earmarked in the policy. “The ANC policy seeks to increase investment and growth in the telecommunications sector. At our recent ANC Lekgotla, we called on government to urgently implement the decision of the 54th National Conference, specifically the need to lower the cost of communications in the country, in particular the cost of data. “The recent ANC Lekgotla has also resolved that government must urgently issue policy for the allocation of radio frequency spectrum to the WOAN, existing operators and new entrants before the investment Summit planned for October this year,” it said. Read: EFF threatens Vodacom over ‘please call me’ payment