The Volvo XC40 is now available in South Africa in a T3 guise, priced at less than R500,000. And the new powertrain is the first three-cylinder engine in the company’s 91-year history. The new 1.5 litre T3, three-cylinder, direct-injection petrol engine was developed in-house using the same modular design as Volvo’s four-cylinder Drive-E engines. The three-cylinder powertrain comes with a six-speed manual transmission while an optional eight-speed transmission will follow at a later date, Volvo said. The T3 compliments the XC40 range already available in the country, of which there are four derivatives, ranging between a XC40 D4 Momentum AWD (Priced from R632,100 – 140 kW) and Volvo XC40 T5 R-Design AWD (Priced from R649,700 – 185 kW). “In South Africa, the XC40 T3 is now available in manual, with the T3 automatic due to follow later next year. With 115 kW and 265 Nm on tap, the XC40 T3 performs exceptionally well and delivers excellent fuel efficiency,” Volvo said. XC40 customers have good choice in trim levels, including Momentum and R-Design, and a new Inscription level. “The Inscription trim offers exterior styling choices with 18″, 19″ or 20″ rims, unique skid plates, side window and grille mesh chrome, plus model-specific car colours. Inside, Inscription adds a newly designed crystal gear knob and the attractive Driftwood deco, which Volvo first introduced in its award-winning XC60 mid-size SUV,” Volvo said. Additional accessories include 21″ Black Diamond Cut alloy wheels, and a new accessory styling kit that offers brushed stainless steel skid plates and integrated dual tailpipes. Functional practicality has also been a major focus on the inside of the XC40, where smart features like a removable rubbish bin, a cubby hole hook, a dedicated smartphone storage area with wireless (inductive) charging, and a multi-adaptable boot floor, transform a typically cluttered and sometimes messy car interior into a place of serenity and organised efficiency.  Read: This bakkie could be the first to top R1 million in South Africa – here are 5 competitors it will need to beat 