Suzuki has unveiled the first all-new Suzuki Jimny 4×4 in two decades, available at dealers in November 2018. The Japanese automaker noted that this is only the fourth all-new model since the LJ10 was launched in 1970. New styling elements include: An overall angular design that is reminiscent of the first LJ and second generation SJ model ranges;
The round headlamps and separate round orange indicators of the LJ10, the first generation;
Side bonnet slits and an angular front windscreen from the SJ series – the first range to be called Giant Killer by the 4×4 community;
Steel wheels similar to the SJ series on the GA spec level;
A clamshell bonnet and upright grille like the SJ and previous generation Jimny;
A moulded rear bumper with lights in the furthermost corners, like the SJ series. “The new Jimny adds some unique features of its own, which include a full drip rail around the roof, which is both functional in rain and off-road conditions and which allows for the easy fitment of a number of roof rails and other accessories,” Suzuki said. Inside the cabin, Suzuki’s designers have also added hints of the new Jimny’s forebears, such as exposed painted metal window frames at shoulder height, a speedometer and tachometer in separate square binnacles and the fit-for-purpose dashboard with many storage binnacles and three-layer design. The new model is built on a new ladder-frame chassis with a patented “X”member between the two rigid axles for 1.5 times the torsional rigidity of its predecessor. Both axles remain rigid, a boon in sand and mud driving; and with the addition of new coil springs and shock absorbers the Jimny now has a 210 mm ground clearance, 20 mm more than before. New engine, more power, less fuel Under the bonnet, Suzuki has fitted its modern K15B petrol engine. This 1.5 litre four cylinder unit replaces the 1.3 litre M13A engine of the previous model and delivers 75kW at 6,000 rpm and 130 Nm at 4,000 rpm. “The new K15B-engine is 15% lighter than the 1.3 litre unit it replaces. The lighter weight, higher compression ratio and overall improvement in efficiency mean that this engine uses more than 14% less fuel than both the manual and automatic versions of its predecessor,” Suzuki said. The engine is mated to a five-speed manual gearbox and an optional four-speed automatic gearbox in GLX specification. All new Jimny models are fitted with a 4×4 system called AllGrip Pro, which allows the driver to comfortably switch between 4×2 (front-wheel drive), 4×4 high and 4×4 low range with a secondary gear lever. This system is supported by both the vehicle stability control (ESP) and a new Brake-enabled Limited Slip Differential system. The new design has enabled Suzuki’s engineers to improve on the Jimny’s already legendary off-road curriculum vitae. The Jimny’s approach angle has improved from 35 degrees to 37 degrees, the breakover angle is up to 28 degrees from 27 degrees and the departure angle has improved significantly from 46 degrees to 49 degrees. In South Africa, Suzuki has added its 7” SLDA – smartphone linkage display – to the new GLX-specification. This large touch screen is fitted with Apple Carplay, Android Auto and Mirror Link to accommodate most smartphones’ in-car features and voice control functionality available in the market today. GA and GLX models available To widen the appeal of the all-new Jimny, Suzuki South Africa will introduce both a GA and GLX specification level. The GLX specification – available with the choice of manual and automatic gearboxes – include features such as a leather-covered multi-function steering wheel, electric windows, colour coded door handles and mirrors, 15” alloy wheels, LED projector headlamps, remote keyless access with central locking and front fog lights. GLX models also have the 7” touchscreen with smartphone connectivity and Bluetooth hands-free operation, cruise control and the 50:50 split rear bench with two headrests. Price Suzuki Jimny 1.5 4×4 GA Manual: R265 000 (estimated)
Suzuki Jimny 1.5 4×4 GLX Manual: R300 000 (estimated)
Suzuki Jimny 1.5 4×4 GLX Auto: R320 000 (estimated) The all-new Jimny will be available to customers from 1 November but interested buyers can view pre-production versions of the new model at the Johannesburg Festival of Motoring at the Kyalami Grand Prix Circuit from 31 August to 2 September 2018.  Read: The new Mercedes-Benz A-Class – South African pricing