Travelers flying between South Africa and London can now experience British Airways’ new restaurant-style dining, which forms part of its £600 million investment in Club World – its long haul business-class service. In a statement released earlier this week, the airline said that customers will be able to select from a choice of freshly prepared starters and desserts from new display trolleys, which are served on new table settings on all flights between Cape Town and Johannesburg and London. “There are four starters, including a soup or salad and meat and fish options such as carpaccio and salmon. This is followed by three entrees with choice of beef, fish or a vegetarian dish. There are five dessert choices, including a cheese board,” it said. British Airways added that the menu will include a carefully curated wine selection. “We’ve really focussed on attention to detail with the new Club World menu, with the aim of delivering a real restaurant experience in the sky,” said Colin Talbot, British Airways’ head of catering. “We’ve considered everything from the flavours and textures, to the look and feel, all of which have to work at altitude. The dishes are designed to pop with taste and the table settings are both elegant and practical, with thought-though details such as stemless wine glasses. “We’ve extensively tested the new menu on numerous flights, refining elements after every trial, so the final product is proving incredibly popular.”  Wi-Fi and bedding The new dining experience follows the introduction of White Company bedding on all the airline’s South African flights, British Airways said. “The iconic British retailer’s onboard range includes and elegant day cushion, a bespoke, luxuriously soft large pillow, a super-soft woven blanket with satin trim and a specially developed luxury duvet to improve the quality of sleep. A padded mattress cover gives an extra layer of comfort,” it said. It said that the White Company will also supply amenity kits, containing the retailer’s ‘Restore & Relax Spa Collection’, as well as a soft jersey eye-mask. “In addition to the product and service improvements in Club World, all customers can also look forward to the latest generation Wi-Fi across British Airways long-haul and short-haul fleets over the next two years,” British Airways said. Read: 5 of the best first-class airlines right now