Travel magazine Travel + Leisure has published the winners of its annual travel awards, which rates the best cities, hotels and destinations around the world. The awards are based on surveys run among T+L’s readership, highlighting where people had the best experiences while abroad. In the 2018 rankings for the top hotels in the world, 27 of the top 100 hotels in the world are in Asia — the most of any region. Europe had 18 winners, and Mexico had 10. Rated as the top hotel in the world in 2018 is the Four Seasons Resort in Bali. South Africa had four hotels feature on the list. Sabi Sabi These two hotels are the Sabi Sabi Private Game Reserve Lodges, and the Sabi Sands Game Reserve, which both ranked 54th on the list overall, with a score of 95.33. The game reserves provide travellers with the safari experience that has become most associated with visiting South Africa, and offers various luxury accommodation offers to accompany their excursions to encounter African wild life. Sabi Sabi offers four different luxury lodges, while Sabi Sands has a greater variety to suit different budgets (including Sabi Sab). Prices range from R12,000 to R31,500 per night at Sabi Sabi.  The Saxon The second best hotel in South Africa, according to T+L, is the Saxon Hotel, Villas and Spa in Johannesburg. The Saxon ranked 29th overall, with a score of 96.13. The Saxon is a luxury setting in the middle of South Africa’s biggest city – located in one of the country’s most expensive suburbs, Sandhurst. Its gardens and five-star accommodation contrasts the idea travellers typically have of a bustling city. Luxury suites can set you back R7,500 per night, which the presidential suite can go as high as R13,000 per night (August pricing). The Nelson Mandela Platinum Suite costs well over R34,000 a night.  La Residence The top-ranked hotel in South Africa is La Residence in Franschoek, which ranked 19th overall, with a score of 96.57. La Residence is surrounded by vineyards and plum orchards, with a mountain backdrop, offering fine dining, luxury accommodation and popular tourist activities like wine tasting and safaris. Prices vary, with an August booking costing between R11,250 and R29,900 per day, depending on the suite booked.  Read: The average cost of a 3, 4 and 5-star hotel room in South Africa right now