Uber has announced a partnership with Chubb Insurance as part of an extended commitment to driver-partner protection in South Africa. Last year, Uber secured injury protection cover for riders from Chubb for every ride requested on the app. Uber driver-partners and Uber Eats delivery-partners will now also benefit from the same cover at no additional cost – from the moment they accept a trip or delivery request, while driving to pick up a rider or on the way to a restaurant, and until the trip ends, the company said. In the unfortunate event of an accident or a crime-related incident resulting in an injury during a trip, drivers and delivery-partners will have access to the following benefits: Emergency medical treatment: If an accident happens On-Trip, this cover reimburses drivers for emergency medical treatment costs they have incurred in the first 48 hours following the accident up to a capped sum. In addition, this cover reimburses ambulance service costs and provides drivers with an immediate small lump sum payment to cover their basic expenses following the accident. Death and final payments: In the unfortunate event that a driver dies as a result of an accident On-Trip, their dependents or heirs will benefit from a lump sum payment. They will also obtain an additional lump sum amount which can be used as they deem fit. Permanent disability payments: In the unfortunate event that a driver suffers a permanent disability as a result of an accident On-Trip, they will benefit from a lump sum payment. The amount depends on the severity of the disability, as determined by Chubb Insurance. Daily confinement payment: If a driver is hospitalised for more than 24 hours they will receive a daily payment for up to 30 days for each day that they have to remain in the hospital. This is non-medical expense cover as a result of hospitalisation and not a substitute for medical aid cover. Daily payment benefit (injury): If a driver is hospitalized for more than 48 hours as a result of an accident that happened On-Trip and are thereafter unable to drive because of those injuries, they will receive a daily payment for up to 30 days whilst they are medically certified by a doctor as unfit to work. In addition to the partner injury protection, Uber’s partnership with RoadCover for riders will also now be extended to driver and delivery-partners. RoadCover will provide assistance and legal representation to drivers and other third parties with their submission of claims submitted to the Road Accident Fund at no additional cost to themselves. “The partner injury protection has been tailored specifically for those on the road, building on the security available through the Uber app and ensuring a safer ride during every journey booked through the Uber app,” it said. “This is an innovative and first of its kind solution for drivers and delivery-partners using technology apps across South Africa and is simultaneously being launched in the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia, Egypt and Pakistan, with Uber looking to add more countries across the Middle East and Africa soon,” it said. Read: Uber hikes prices in South Africa