South Africans typically don’t know how much it really costs to keep their cars on the road each day. This is according to the Automobile Association (AA), which says it is important for all vehicle owners to understand that the cost of owning a vehicle goes far beyond the cost of fuel. “Too many people assume the cost of the vehicle is the repayment of the loan (if they have one), and the cost of fuel. But, in reality, the cost of vehicle ownership extends further and vehicle owners must know exactly how much they are spending on their cars, and where it is going,” the Association said. In a recent survey by the AA on vehicle ownership costs, almost 40% of those polled said they don’t know how much it costs to own and run their cars every month. This is despite the fact that the most common issues affecting motorists are rising fuel costs, maintenance costs, and unexpected repair expenses, it said. “The type of car you drive, how you drive, the fuel you use (and where you fill-up), the tyres you use, the terrain you drive on, the kilometres you drive daily, weekly, monthly and annually, and the insurance cover you have on the vehicle are just some of the factors you need to consider when calculating the true cost of keeping your car on the road,” said the AA. It added that things such as maintenance and service plans, instalment payments, and unexpected expenses such as cracked windshields and windows (which, for a small number of owners is covered by insurance, but even this may require excess payments), should also be factored into the total cost of ownership of a vehicle. “If, for instance, your drive a small sedan at the coast, the total AA rate calculated on the vehicle may be R3.35 per driving kilometre which amounts to R67,000 if you drive 20,000 km a year. “An SUV driven inland over the same distance is going to be markedly more expensive – around R137,000 per year. “But, importantly, this doesn’t only cover the cost of fuel, it also covers all costs associated with keeping the car on the road. People working on a budget, especially in these tough economic times, must keep a track of these expenses to ensure their vehicle is adequately covered financially at all times,” the AA said. High price A recent Wesbank report found that the average monthly cost to run a car in South Africa has increased by approximately R940 or 14% in the last year – up 31% since 2013. Wesbank said that vehicle instalments and fuel spend remain the biggest components, accounting for 80% of monthly mobility spend. This means that the average monthly cost of owning a vehicle is just shy of R8,000 when factoring in running costs, insurance, fuel and instalments. “The past year has been a rollercoaster ride with drastic fuel price fluctuations making it difficult for consumers to keep track of monthly budgets,” said Ghana Msibi, executive head of sales and marketing at WesBank. “As a rule, we generally advise motorists to allow some breathing room in their budgets to help absorb these changing costs.”  Read: Here is the expected petrol price for September