Are you craving a series marathon? Or perhaps just feel like lazing on the couch to watch a side-splitting comedy? Showmax has you sorted with unlimited streaming entertainment for only R99 per month. The good news for DStv subscribers is that they get huge savings on the subscription price. DStv Premium subscribers get Showmax included with the cost of their subscription, so they pay absolutely nothing extra, while DStv Compact and Compact Plus subscribers save R50 per month, paying only R49 for a full Showmax subscription. To cash in on these deals, DStv subscribers can simply add Showmax to their monthly DStv account. Sign up for a Showmax subscription.
Use a device that you can connect to the Internet, such as a smartphone, tablet, laptop, gaming console, a DStv Explora, or a smart TV. Users can watch Showmax on multiple Internet-connected devices, from their phone to the web browser on their PC – and if you use the Showmax app for smartphones and tablets, you can even download series or movies to watch offline later. Users who own a connected Explora can press the blue DStv button on their remote, click watch now, and select Showmax to start watching. Already a Showmax subscriber? Here’s how to add Showmax to your DStv account If you already have a credit, cheque card, or a PayPal subscription, all you need to do is login into your Showmax account and change the payment method to “DStv add to account”. To add Showmax to their DStv account, users can sign up for a Showmax subscription, and then select “DStv add to account” as the payment method. In order to change their payment from one of Showmax’s partners (e.g. your bank or cellphone network), users will need to contact the company that is billing them and cancel their subscription. It is as simple as that. DStv Premium subscribers pay nothing extra, and DStv Compact and Compact Plus subscribers pay just R49 per month for unlimited access to 35 000 of the best series episodes, movies, kids’ shows and documentaries, with more content added every week. For more on how to watch Showmax as a DStv subscriber, read this blog post. Don’t miss out on getting much more for even less with Showmax. Sign up here. This article was published in partnership with Showmax.