Eskom is currently not load shedding – however, the risk remains high, especially for the evening peak period from 17h00 – 21h00. In a statement released on Wednesday afternoon (22 August), the power utility said this is due to a number of generating units being out on maintenance and possibly not being back in time to meet the evening peak period. “Eskom will advise if load shedding will be conducted in either stage 1, stage 2, stage 3 or stage 4, dependent on the capacity shortage,” it said. “Stage 1 requires 1000MW to be rotationally load shed nation-wide, stage 2 requires 2000MW, stage 3 requires 3000MW and stage 4 calls for up to 4000MW to be rotationally load shed nationally at a given period. “Load shedding is conducted rotationally as a measure of last resort to protect the power system from a total collapse or blackout.” It further encouraged residents and businesses to use electricity sparingly to ease demand. “Customers are advised to keep checking their load shedding schedules on the Eskom or municipal website, and plan on the assumption that load shedding will take place.” Wasting taxpayer money Earlier in the day the embattled power provider came under fire from the Standing Committee on Public Accounts (Scopa) after it failed to respond on questions on deviations and expansions that took place in the fourth quarter of 2017/18. According to the Scopa,  Eskom had previously ranked first on a list of deviations among all entities and departments. “Scopa is not pleased with how Eskom failed to respond to questions based on the presentations that Eskom itself has provided to the committee. It is really a shame that taxpayers’ money was wasted by Eskom by bringing a big delegation to Parliament that failed to respond to questions based on a presentation prepared for them,” it said. “This is a direct reflection of the management of Eskom as a company that Eskom officials do not take Parliament very seriously. It is really embarrassing that Eskom could not even respond to its own presentation. What has happened today inspires no confidence in Eskom.” Read: Sasol impacted by Eskom electricity supply interruptions