MTN will launch its new fibre-to-the-home offering, Supersonic, on 3 September. MTN said that the goal of Supersonic will be to deliver the best customer experience in a fibre market still hampered by a general lack of service delivery and customer satisfaction. “Complaints of too much complexity, network instability and poor after-sales services continue to plague the fibre industry and we aim to change that,” said Supersonic CEO, Calvin Collett. “Our focus is on meeting customer needs and expectations by using skilled technicians trained by us, innovative user-friendly apps and before and after-sale service expertise and channels to ensure customers receive speedy service off the back of the country’s fastest and most stable network.” MTN SA CEO Godfrey Motsa added that the company aimed to deliver an uncapped, reliable and cost- effective solution to many more homes across the country. “We look forward to seeing this expanded to entrepreneurs and businesses next year. Of course, it is essential the solution always meets the high standards of customer centric support and service we are known for,” said Motsa. He noted that Supersonic’s focus is on consumers this year and then next year to make a wholesale offering available to businesses.  The move from Smart Village MTN bought Smart Village from Multichoice in late 2015 to make inroads in the fibre-to-the-home market. Speaking to BusinessTech at an event on Thursday (30 August), Collett said that the ‘Smart Village’ name had legacy, which prompted a rebrand to Supersonic. “Ultimately it was a combination of factors,” he said. “We merged the MTN FTTH network and the Smart Village network. Smart Village had quite a legacy, it was a thirteen year old company that changed hands six or seven times and had many peaks and troughs.” “During MTN’s acquisition, there was a 15 month period during the handover between Multichoice and MTN where customers really weren’t happy. Plus we wanted a ‘yellow-brand’ powered by MTN,” Collett said. Read: This is the best place to get free Wi-Fi in South Africa