Huawei says that it has pushed ahead of Apple to claim second spot in global smartphone shipments in the second quarter, behind only Samsung Electronics. The group said that its market share globally has grown rapidly to 15.8%, thanks to its Mate 10 and P20 series. Since the launch of the P20 in April – the group has shipped nine million units in four months, said Likun Zhao, general manager of Huawei consumer business group South Africa. In the high-end market – handsets exceeding $500 – the group has seen its market share grow to 16.4%, from 12.8% over the past year, to the end of June 2018. Huawei noted that it also ranks among the top four brands, globally, for wearable devices. Zhao said that the group aims a further push into the local market through its smart watches and smart bands. The group said it wants to continue to push into the health and fitness market through its cloud ecosystem, including South Africa. Globally, Huawei said it has 100 million health and fitness related customers. According to market research firm IDC, Huawei shipped 54.2 million phones in the quarter, 41% more than a year earlier, to jump ahead of iPhone maker, Apple, for the first time. Apple secured 12% market share for the period, while Samsung was in first place with 21%. In South Africa, the group has grown its market share from 9%, to 14.5% in H1 2018 – also ahead of Apple, which has a 4% local market share. “Maybe one year, maybe, two year, depending on our strategy, we can achieve this target,” said Zhao of the group’s ambition to overtake Samsung. He said he has been in contact with the company’s headquarters to increase market share locally. Huawei said that sales for its P20 series of devices have exceeded those of its predecessor, the Huawei P10 series by almost double to date. Zhao said that Huawei has also seen some traction in the ‘lower’ end of the market, and will continue to introduce phones in this range locally. Smartphone sales in South Africa grew by 12.4% year-on-year in the first quarter of 2018, reaching around 3.2 million units for the period, according to point of sale data from market research firm, GfK South Africa. And the value of the smartphone segment increased by as much as 22.8% as sales of entry-level devices to low- and mid-income consumers continued to drive the market, it said recently. Read: Top 10 best-selling smartphone brands in the world right now