Ipsos has released the findings of its latest ‘pulse of the people’ poll. The survey conducted in May – June this year questioned 3,619 randomly selected South Africans in face-to-face interviews. For the most part, respondents were uncertain as to the country’s future, with more than half (54%) agreeing that ‘the future of the ANC is uncertain because of the leadership issues within the party’. “As can be expected, larger proportions of supporters of the main opposition parties (the DA and the EFF) agree that the ANC has an uncertain future, but it is interesting to note that over half (52%) of ANC supporters also agree,” Ipsos said. “Only one in every five South Africans (20%) feel certain about the future of the party,” it added. Ramaphosa as president All respondents, regardless of political opinion, were asked to rate Cyril Ramaphosa (among others) as a political leader. The chart below illustrates his growing support. During his time as deputy president he consistently outperformed then president Jacob Zuma, and since becoming president in February 2018, his popularity has increased. “This is exceptional against the background of the general uncertainty in the country and the uncertainty expressed about the ANC’s future,” Ipsos said. Support for Ramaphosa is least felt in the Western and Eastern Cape, and KwaZulu-Natal, although he still outperforms all other political leaders in every province. In Mpumalanga, the president scores 8.5 out of 10 while David Mabuza who originates from this province receives a score of 6.1 out of 10. In the Eastern Cape, the leader performing almost on par with the president is Pravin Gordhan, with a score of 6.5 and in KZN former president Jacob Zuma scores 5.9 as opposed to Ramaphosa’s 6.3. In the Western Cape, the province under DA administration, performance of Mmusi Maimane is closest to Ramaphosa with a score of 5.7 out of 10. “Supporters from both the DA and the EFF rate the president’s performance higher than 5 out of 10. If we compare president Ramaphosa’s performance with that of the other political party leaders and the deputy president, it becomes evident how far ahead the president is and how much South Africans expect leadership from him,” Ipsos said. “It is natural that both Mmusi Maimane and Julius Malema enjoy strong support from their own parties, but not so from supporters of other political parties,” Ipsos said.  Malema and Maimane   Read: EFF tables bill to make central bank state-owned