The Informatics Institute recently published its Universal Ranking by Academic Performance (URAP) for subjects, listing the world’s top universities according to how they excel in various fields of study. The ranking lists the top 1,000 universities in the world across 61 fields of study (some rankings are limited to top 500 or top 200, depending on how narrow the field is), with 12 South African universities ranked in 38 of them. The University of Cape Town was by far the top performer in the country, ranking among the world’s best in 32 of the 61 subjects – having a unique placing in four of them. Stellenbosch University is the second-best performer, ranking in 24 subjects, followed by the University of Pretoria (22 subjects), and Wits University and the University of KwaZulu Natal tied, being ranked in 21 fields, each. However, where UKZN stands apart from Wits is its unique placing in three subjects where no other South African universities featured. Where Wits stands out, is its top 10 placing for Anthropology and Archeology – the only South African university to rank within the top 10 at all for any subject. The key focus of the URAP is on academic performance, which is measured on six academic performance indicators. Since URAP is an academic performance based ranking, publications constitute the basis of the ranking methodology, it said. Both quality and quantity of publications and international research collaboration performance are used as indicators. The overall score of each university is based on its performance over several indicators, including current scientific productivity, research impact, research quality and international acceptance. This is how South Africa’s universities performed. Unique listings have been highlighted. University of Cape Town  Stellenbosch University  University of Pretoria  University of KwaZulu Natal  Wits University  University of Johannesburg  North-West University  Rhodes University  University of the Free State  University of the Western Cape  Nelson Mandela University  Tshwane University of Technology  Read: These are the best subjects to take at the top universities in South Africa