Doros Hadjizenonos, a well-known figure in the SA information security arena, has been appointed as the new Regional Sales Director for Fortinet Southern Africa with effect from 1 July, 2018. The appointment bolsters the Fortinet Southern Africa team, which is seeing increasing local demand for Fortinet’s next-generation network and content security solutions, now uniquely synchronised through the Fortinet Security Fabric. “Doros brings with him a wealth of experience in this sector, and we’re delighted to welcome him to the team,” says Perry Hutton, Regional Vice President – Africa at Fortinet. Hadjizenonos, formerly country manager at Check Point South Africa, has over 20 years’ experience in information security products, sales and distribution. “I’m excited at the prospect of helping grow Fortinet’s market in the region, focusing on additional support for the channel and ensuring that customers enjoy excellent pre- and post-sales support,” says Hadjizenonos. He is confident that there is significant room for Fortinet to grow in the local market. “Local CISOs know that the security discussion has to move beyond firewalls, and Fortinet brings to market a wide range of fantastic solutions that are tightly integrated in the very impressive Fortinet Security Fabric. I have been very impressed with the automatic remediation and intelligence-sharing within the Security Fabric.” Having built much of his career around Check Point, Hadjizenonos says he looks forward to the new challenges facing him in his role at Fortinet: “Fortinet is a great vendor, very sound financially, and they invest in both R&D and their people, which I believe is a good recipe for a long career with them.” Learn more at http://www.fortinet.com, the Fortinet Blog, or FortiGuard Labs. Fortinet (NASDAQ: FTNT) secures the largest enterprise, service provider, and government organizations around the world. Fortinet empowers its customers with intelligent, seamless protection across the expanding attack surface and the power to take on ever-increasing performance requirements of the borderless network – today and into the future. Only the Fortinet Security Fabric architecture can deliver security without compromise to address the most critical security challenges, whether in networked, application, cloud or mobile environments. Fortinet ranks #1 in the most security appliances shipped worldwide and more than 350,000 customers trust Fortinet to protect their businesses. This article was published in partnership with Fortinet.