Mercedes-Benz has officially launched its new A-Class in South Africa. The compact vehicle is available in two variants – the A200 and the A250 Sport, with the diesel model expected in South Africa in early 2019. The A200 is powered by a 1.33 litre unit which generates 120 kW and 250 Nm of torque with a 7G DCT dual-clutch transmission (5.2 l/100 km). The 2.0 litre engine of the A250 Sport generates 165 kW and 350 Nm, and is available with the 7G-DCT dual-clutch transmission which provides a claimed fuel consumption of 6.2 l/100 km. New features for both engines include camtronic for the intake camshaft, and particulate filter as standard. The new A-Class is also the first Mercedes-Benz model to feature the intelligent multimedia system MBUX – Mercedes-Benz User Experience. The MBUX learns and adapts to suit the user through artificial intelligence so the more a user interacts with it, the more the new A-Class becomes just like them. In addition, MBUX offers intelligent voice control with natural language comprehension. By using the phrase ‘Hey Mercedes’, users can adjust the air-conditioning, send a text message, or find the quickest route out of the Cape Town city centre on a Friday afternoon. New and improved Mercedes connect services are also being launched with MBUX, Mercedes said. These include navigation functions like emergency braking, On-Street Prediction, Real-Time Information and Off-Street Information, which save time and reduce stress levels when searching for a parking space. The new A-Class also offers a number of functions that were previously the preserve of the luxury class: real-time parking, for example, and the ability to drive semi-autonomously in certain situations. To do this, it keeps a close eye on the traffic as the improved camera and radar systems allow it to see up to 500m ahead.     Pricing Pricing for the new A-Class starts at R499,000 for the A200 and R593,300 for the A250 Sport. You can find a full breakdown of the specifications for both variants below.  Read: 6 surprisingly powerful ‘sleeper’ cars in South Africa