At the end of June, the Spur Corporation announced that it would be expanding its restaurant portfolio with the acquisition of a 51% stake in the fast-growing franchise restaurant group, Nikos Coalgrill Greek. Nikos currently operates six franchised restaurants, with a further four outlets confirmed to open in the coming months. The first restaurant opened in Durban North in March 2017 and the two most recent outlets opened in Sandton and Randpark Ridge in April this year. The other outlets are in Ballito, Fourways and Pretoria East.  In a shareholder announcement, Spur said that it would acquire the 51% shareholding from the founding family members, Peter, Nicolette and Nicholas Triandafillou and Pano Economou, who will retain the balance of the shareholding and continue to manage the business with the support of the Spur group’s franchising expertise. The purchase consideration will be calculated based on a five-times earnings multiple after year three. Spur Corporation will have an option to acquire an additional 19% shareholding after three years.  “We believe the Nikos Coalgrill Greek brand has the potential to expand to around 50 restaurants nationally over the next few years,” said Spur Corporation CEO Pierre van Tonder. “We are pleased to be able to retain the services and expertise of the founders who are passionate about the Nikos brand and traditional Greek food. He added that Spur – as a multi-brand restaurant franchisor – is experienced in acquiring and expanding niche restaurant concepts. “Our most recent acquisition, Rocomamas, has grown from five outlets when we bought the business in 2015 to a national footprint of 64 restaurants with a further six outside South Africa,” he said.  Notably, the franchise has already found a following among young South Africans, and is quickly becoming a popular meet-up point – not unlike Rocomamas. Its menu features a number of Greek-favourites including Souvlaki and Yiros, while the chain has begun to garner a reputation for its colourful cocktails. The franchise’s restaurant design and layout also stand out, with no two restaurants appearing identical, and a number of airy interiors that incorporate white, blue and wood. Read: These are the biggest fast food franchises in South Africa