Following the release of the Dakar Limited Edition – which introduced a bold new ‘square’ face for the Hilux – Toyota has announced further tweaks to its popular bakkie range as well as a number of additional models catering to both utility and convenience-minded customers. This will include a number of changes to its mid-tier Hilux SRX models as well its range-topping Raider models, Toyota said. “The new SRX model adopts a black-themed front design to reinforce the tough, no-nonsense appearance of these mid-tier models. Colour-coded bumpers remain while inheriting a matching stylised skid plate on the lower apron. Functional black side steps and side mirrors add a rugged touch,” it said. The new model will now also feature auto light control incorporating a follow-me-home functionality, and all SRX models will inherit a 4-speaker touchscreen infotainment system (previously utilised on Raider grade) with Bluetooth and USB interface. Toyota added that its range-topping Raider models will receive a chrome grille surround which offsets the black horizontal slats and ‘creates a premium appearance’. Its touchscreen multimedia system has also been upgraded to include satellite navigation and DVD-playback compatibility. As a carry-over from the Dakar limited edition, the Raider will also feature a new full black interior, complete with black headliner and metallic-black interior trim accents.    More models and pricing “A number of new utility-focused derivatives have been added to the Hilux range across all three body styles – in an effort to best serve our diverse customer base,” Toyota said. This will include new Single-Cab, Xtra Cab, Double Cab variants, and the manufacturer added that it has plans to re-introduce its ‘Chassis-Cab’ Hilux variants. All Hilux models come with a 3-year/100 000 km warranty. A 9-services/90 000 km service plan is standard on all models. Customers can also purchase extended service plans via their Toyota dealer. You can find the pricing for all the new and current Hilux variants detailed below. Single-Cab  Xtra-Cab  Double-Cab  Chassis-Cab  Read: New baby Volvo SUV hits South Africa – pricing