With the local economy expected to show an uptick in activity in 2018, data collected by three separate sources, including two recruitment agencies and a salary comparison and career resource group, shows which jobs pay the best salaries in South Africa. Specialist recruitment firm Michael Page recently published its salary survey, showing what skilled professionals could expect to earn in 2018. Its salary information is based on an extensive recruitment database, which covers more than 1,536 job roles, and over 100,000 candidates. It says that local demand for skilled professionals in the workplace remains high, particularly in the financial services sector, in all roles from bankers and accountants to IT and support. These are some of the best paid jobs, according to Michael Page: A separate report from Robert Walters shows how much salaries are expected to increase for skilled professionals in the finance and legal industries. According to the group’s survey, general salaries in South Africa are expected to increase by 5% on average in 2018 – a modest rise in line with inflation. However, professionals with highly sought-after skillsets can expect to see rises of between 12% and 15%, with finance professionals enjoying the strongest average salary growth at 7%, with legal professionals seeing an average of 5% increases. These are some of the best paid jobs, according to Robert Walters: Data from salary comparison and career resource group Salary Explorer lists 22 jobs in South Africa that draw in a total package over R1 million a year. The group’s data represents a combination of user-reported data and salary information from various recruitment agencies, companies and employers. According to Salary Explorer, the average annual salary in South Africa is R337,000 before taxes – or just over R28,000 a month. The bulk of R1 million-plus jobs in South Africa are in the management and executive category, with chief investment officers ranking at the top with an average salary of R1.68 million a year. This is followed by a legal services director (R1.55 million) and an IT director (R1.49 million). Read: These are the jobs young South Africans most want to get into