PriceCheck, the price comparison platform, has relaunched with a new look and enhanced functionality in order to make it easier to filter through product ranges. “This is not just a reskin of an old website,” the company said in a press statement on Wednesday (14 March), “the new PriceCheck service has been built from the ground up, giving shoppers the ultimate comparison and buying experience.” The new website has enhanced and simplified navigation that encourages consumers to spend more time on the site, enabling more informed buying decisions from a range of shops, it said. New features include: Side-by-side product comparison – Compare like-for-like products side-by-side. Evaluate price points, specifications and sellers.
Multi-shop orders – PriceCheck has made it easy to shop from multiple shops in a single transaction.
Detailed product descriptions – Shoppers are given an in-depth description of each product so that they are well armed to make informed purchasing decisions.
Themed product pages – Shoppers who need goods for a specific type of event or occasion (eg. wedding items, Christmas decor, etc) will be able to browse the specially themed pages and find everything that they would possibly need in one place.
High quality images – It’s now easier than ever for the consumer to see exactly what they are purchasing thanks to improved product pictures.
Beautiful design – The new service has been designed to be modern and user-friendly, while at the same time enabling transactional e-commerce. The site is also optimised for mobile, it added. “PriceCheck has been around for 12 years. To keep pace with the rapid evolution of local e-commerce we’ve regularly improved the PriceCheck user experience,” said PriceCheck CEO, Kevin Tucker. “This redesign is geared towards enabling cross-category e-commerce and growing small and large businesses as a result – maintaining our position as South Africa’s leading product discovery and comparison platform.” Read: How much money you can get for your old iPhone on Gumtree