Ahead of the New York Auto Show, which kicks off on Friday, German carmaker Audi has unwrapped its 2019 Audi RS 5 which is available as Sportback for the first time, and comes with a V6 twin turbo under the hood. The 2.9 TFSI can achieve 331 kW (444 bhp) while its maximum torque of 600 Nm is deployed throughout a wide speed range from 1,900 to 5,000 rpm. Michael-Julius Renz, head of Audi Sport GmbH, said: “The new Audi RS 5 Sportback is a true international car – we expect it to conquer all markets.” The Audi RS 5 Sportback accelerates from 0 to 60 mph in 3.9 seconds, with the possibility of reaching a top speed of 174 mph (280 kph), Audi said. The launch comes a week after Audi AG said it plans to invest nearly $50 billion in new models and technology over the next five years in a bid to regain lost ground from its German rivals, as each automaker extends its range of sporty sedans and crossovers, Bloomberg reported. “Audi’s strategy is to increase variants and electric models in its already sedan-dense lineup. Executives have said they’ll show 20 new models this year alone,” it said. The sporty interior of the new Audi RS 5 Sportback is finished in black, and provides space for five people. Its square-shaped profile and loading width measuring exactly one meter enables optimum use of the 480 litre trunk capacity. Folding down the rear seats increases the capacity to 1,300 liters. The RS 5 Sportback weighs 1,840 kilograms. “The sporty nature of the five-door high-performance coupé is emphasized by details such as the RS sport seats with optional honeycomb pattern in fine Nappa leather, and the flat-bottomed RS multifunction sports leather steering wheel. RS emblems can be found on the seats, the steering wheel, the sill panel strips and on the selector lever. “Special RS information displays in the Audi virtual cockpit provide information on tyre pressure, torque and G forces. “In manual mode, the shift light display prompts the driver to shift up once the engine speed threshold is reached,” Audi said. The Audi RS 5 Sportback will initially be available in dealerships in the USA and Canada from the second half of 2018.  Read: Lexus unveils its first luxury compact crossover set for South Africa in 2019