Following concern from a number of South African users, Uber South Africa has announced a new call-back line for safety-related matters. The call-back line will provide riders with 24/7 access to speak to Uber’s Global Incident Response Team (IRT) should they have a safety related issue, Uber said in a statement on Tuesday (13 March). The call-back line, which has been in its test phase since December 2017, will provide riders with 24/7 access to speak to Uber’s Global Incident Response Team (IRT). Riders can submit a ticket for a critical safety incident or accident through the app, including their contact number and short description of the event. The rider will then receive a call-back within a couple minutes from Uber’s Global Incident Response Team. GM for Uber Sub-Saharan Africa, Alon Lits, said that the feature was introduced after hundreds of thousands of riders using the Uber app in South Africa expressed the need to be able to speak with Uber’s teams in the event of a critical safety-related issue. “While part of Uber’s commitment is to ensure rider safety, we strongly encourage riders to always first use the national emergency line (10111). With the introduction of the IRT call-back line, we are able to help riders speak with our dedicated IRT within minutes” adds Lits. “Everyone has the right to be safe, whether they’re on a train, in a taxi, walking on a sidewalk or in an Uber. “And while no means of transportation can be 100% incident or accident-free, technology apps like Uber can improve safety, which is why the IRT call-back line is a great step forward,” he said How to access the IRT call back line Here is how to access the new safety features according to Uber: Open the menu of the Uber app, and click ‘Help’
Click ‘Trip and fare review’
Select the trip in question
Select ‘I had a safety-related issue
Submit a ticket through the node, including a contact number and short description of the event
The rider will then receive a call-back within a couple minutes! Read: How to become an Uber driver in South Africa