The latest QS World University Rankings has listed all the subjects that South Africa’s top universities excel at in 2018 – ranking among the top 500 courses in the world. The report covers 42 subjects in arts and humanities; engineering and technology; life sciences and medicine; natural sciences; and social sciences. South African universities stand out for their expertise in development studies, QS said, while South Africa’s top-ranked university – the University of Cape Town – ranked within the top 100 globally for 11 subjects. Overall, UCT has 35 subjects ranked within the top 500 universities in the world (all within the top 350), while the University of the Witwatersrand has 21 subjects within the top 500. This is followed by Stellenbosch University with 18 subjects, the University of Pretoria with 15 subjects, UKZN with 8, the University of Johannesburg with 4 and Rhodes university with 2 subjects. Five of South Africa’s universities perform strongly in developmental studies, with the subject being the highest-ranked subject at UCT, Stellies, UJ and UKZN. At Wits, the subject is the second strongest subject, after mining and mineral engineering, where Wits ranks as the 15th best university in the world for that subject. Wits is also the only university in South Africa ranked for mathematics. The University of Pretoria and the University of KwaZulu-Natal, meanwhile, are also the best universities in the country theological and religious studies, and Rhodes makes its mark known in communication and media studies. The tables below outline the top subjects to study at South Africa’s ranked universities. Subjects within the top 100 are highlighted in green. University of Cape Town  University of the Witwatersrand  Stellenbosch University  University of Pretoria  University of KwaZulu-Natal  University of Johannesburg  Rhodes University  The QS subject rankings are based on a mix of survey responses and hard data, compiled and weighted to formulate a final score. This includes academic reputation, employer reputation, citations per paper, the h-index (an index that measures both the productivity and impact of the published work of a scientist or scholar) as well as insight from discipline-level experts and specialists. Read: How much it will cost to send your kids to school and university over the next 18 years in South Africa