When it comes to repaying any big loan – be it vehicle finance, a home loan or a personal loan – financial experts advise that any time you can afford to make a bigger repayment, you should do so, as reducing the total outstanding amount ultimately means you will pay significantly less in interest. Lenders provide online calculation tools to provide some indication of how much you will end up paying for your loan over a set time. However, because the two key components of the loan – interest rate and repayment period – are unique to each individual, they can never give you a true reflection of the loan, without an official application and credit check. Despite this, you are still able to get a good idea of how much you could save by paying a bit more every month, and reducing the overall term of the loan. BusinessTech looked at how much consumers would have to pay to take out a R100,000 personal loan from the country’s biggest lenders across three main interest rates – the minimum (10.25%), maximum (27.75%) and a middle ground rate (21%) – and how much they could save by paying the loan back sooner. Personal loans have several components, which all add to the cost of taking it out. These are: Service fee: a monthly administration fee. Currently this is at a fixed rate of R68.40 per month across all lenders.
Interest: a percentage of the amount you borrowed is paid as interest. Currently, the prime lending rate is 10.25%, with the maximum allowed for loans at 27.75%.
Initiation fee: a once-off fee for entering into a credit agreement. Currently, this is standard at R1,197 across all lenders.
Credit insurance: insurance that covers the provider if death or retrenchment prevents you from repaying the loan. While each bank’s calculation tools have slightly different results (due to different calculation methods) they all generally fall into the same area when it comes to monthly repayments and totals paid. This was confirmed by using a ‘basic’ loan amortisation formula. Because of these differences, the information below isn’t a direct comparison between products, but rather an illustrative guide on how payment periods can impact how much you end up paying on a loan. The tables below illustrate how much you would need to pay to take out a R100,000 loan – and how much you would save if you were to pay back the loan a year earlier. Initial loan amount: R100,000
Loan period: 60 months (48 months for a year of saving)
Service fees paid: R4,104 (R3,283 for 48 months)
Initiation fee: R1,197
Credit insurance has not been included. The calculations are based on the information provided by each banking group via their website. FNB does not have online personal loan calculators available thus was not included. Basic calculation Standard Bank Capitec Capitec’s rates are different to other banks in that it’s minimum interest rate is 16.3%, while it caps the maximum at 27.45%. Nedbank Absa * Minus service fees Read: How much you can save just by paying R890 extra into your home loan each month