South Africa’s airports have once again been recognised on the global aviation stage – this time at the 2018 Skytrax Awards held in Stockholm, Sweden. Cape Town International Airport was awarded first place in the category for Best Airport in Africa for the third consecutive year. King Shaka International Airport was named Best Regional Airport in Africa. The World’s Top 10 Airports: Singapore Changi Airport
Incheon International Airport
Tokyo Haneda International Airport
Hong Kong International Airport
Hamad International Airport
Munich Airport
Chubu Centrair International Airport
London Heathrow Airport
Zurich Airport
Frankfurt Airport Cape Town placed 21st overall, down from 19th in 2017, while Durban climbed several spots to 26th overall, from 35th before. The awards are the outcome of the views of customers in the largest independent global airport customer satisfaction survey. The Skytrax Awards are based on more than 14-million airport survey questionnaires that were completed by air travellers of more than 100 nationalities during the survey period. The survey covered more than 550 airports worldwide. It evaluated traveller experiences across 39 key performance indicators from check-in, arrivals, transfers, shopping, security and immigration, through to departure at the gate. The Skytrax Awards were announced just a few weeks after two South African airports excelled in the annual Airport Service Quality (ASQ) awards of the Airports Council International and determined by independent surveys of passengers around the world. George Airport, in the Western Cape, was honoured as Africa’s Best Airport by Region (under two million passengers per year) and King Shaka International Airport came in third place in the category for Best Airport by Region (over two million passengers per year). The successful work on customer service has also been reflected in strong performances in terms of passenger numbers. A highlight of the peak holiday season was the continued extraordinary growth in international passengers at Cape Town International Airport. International arrivals went up by 13.85% and international departures experienced a 15.69% growth in the fourth quarter compared to the same period in 2016; In addition, King Shaka International Airport continued to enjoy solid growth in domestic passenger traffic with arrivals up 5.63% and departures up 6.17% in the fourth quarter of 2017. Read: New Cape Town airport runway a step closer