Faced with declining market share and a share price which has fallen steadily since early 2015, Lenovo has recently announced its comeback plans – which includes the South African market. In a recent interview with BusinessTech, Thibault Dousson, GM, Lenovo South Africa & SADC, said the company has ambition to compete for the no1 position in the PC market with HP. He said that the stable rand in recent months has helped when it comes to bringing stock into the country, adding that the appointment of Cyril Ramaphosa as president of the country is likely to be good for business in 2018, with the consumer likely to safer about spending money in a growing economy. Dousson noted, however, that the results of the ANC elections in December could have had a big impact on the company’s forecast for 2018 had it gone against the current president.  International Data Corporation (IDC) data Lenovo released several new products into the local market in recent months. “Through research and speaking with countless customers, we learned three things people value most when it comes to the technology they use: time, comfort, and connection. These are the elements that will drive personalised computing for Lenovo and our customers as technology continues to intelligently transform our lives,” Dousson said. Time “Time is our most precious resource. I speak to customers who use apps like Waze to check the traffic up ahead on their chosen route, or who add items to an online groceries app rather than write them down or try and remember them later. “Capturing ideas in the moment is a great example of how people are using technology to get more done in shorter time frames,” said Dousson. “PCs that are always on and ready to go with easy access to digital assistants and stronger collaboration solutions are going to change the way we streamline our tasks at hand.” Comfort “The dominant device today is the smartphone, often with a laptop and/or a tablet to go with it. So, we know with confidence that people are increasingly looking for portable technology – lightweight devices that provide the freedom and comfort to move around with ease. “It’s interesting to see how and where user trends develop. For example, in China, the social media platform WeChat has huge numbers of users and this led to users there adopting large smartphone screens ahead of the west. “What followed globally of course were bigger screens, still with comfort and freedom top of mind. At Lenovo, we’re also looking ahead at bendable and foldable form factors and on-screen experiences to help people to do more of the things they want in new and more comfortable ways,” Dousson said. Connection “We see a big opportunity at the intersection of personal and communal computing, creating better shared experiences to help families and friends stay closer, and to help distributed business teams collaborate more effectively,” Dousson said. “These are the issues that matter most to people, and what we believe will drive personalised computing over the next couple of years,” he said. Read: Lenovo launches new products in SA as it targets further growth