As Cape Town property prices continue to outpace that of most areas, buyers may despair thinking that they won’t be able to capitalise on a great location and the famous lifestyle on offer, but Seeff’s agents say there are many areas which offer a great deal and you can still enjoy the same benefits. If it is a coastal lifestyle or fabulous sea view that you want and cannot afford the Atlantic Seaboard, then why not look at these hot spots: Strand and Gordon’s Bay Louelle Lubbe, director for Seeff Strand and Gordon’s Bay says that the scenic location and fabulous beaches are a big attraction. These areas are also self-contained offering a full spectrum of facilities and amenities including good schools. “The affordability is a big draw card, as is the proximity to the city and surrounding areas such as Somerset West and Stellenbosch for work. “There is literally something for everyone, from starter homes to family houses, retirement homes, holiday beach apartments and there are even golf estate homes. Apartment prices start at R480,000 and average family houses at R950,000-R1.5 million,” Lubbe said. Greenways Golf Estate offers a mix of sectional and full title properties in the R2.8 million-R8 million range. Gordon’s Bay apartments start at R560,000 and houses at R980,000 ranging to R18 million for luxury homes that hug the mountain and overlook the ocean, Seeff said. False Bay – Muizenberg Gary Grobbelaar, CEO of Seeff False Bay and the South Eastern Suburbs said that the little village of Muizenberg has broad appeal, from residential to rental investments, retirement and holiday properties. “It is one of the best surfing beaches and a tourist hot spot. The whole area is popular for its sunbathing, kayaking and yachting and of course the little shops, cafés and diners are a big attraction as are restaurants such as Live Bait and Harbour House,” Grobbelaar said. “Prices in the village range from around R1.8 million-R3.8 million range. Capricorn Beach Estate offers fabulous sectional title properties and is ideal for children as there are play areas and two swimming pools. “It is very affordably priced from R950,000-R2.8 million. Marina da Gama offers lovely Fisherman-style homes located around canals and average prices around the R1.2 million-R3.2 million range,” Seeff said. Blouberg Blouberg is famed as one of the best Kite Surfing destinations in the world. It is fast growing with new facilities such as the new Table Bay Mall and top class schools including a new Curro School. No matter where you settle, whether you choose Parklands, Table View or Sunningdale or West Beach or Big Bay, you are close to the beaches according to Clinton Martle, Seeff Blouberg Licensee. “You hardly ever need to leave the area as everything is right here, he says. At the same time, you enjoy the best views, from Robben Island across Table Bay to the city and Table Mountain. “The area is seen by many as an excellent alternative to the very pricey Atlantic Seaboard given that you can still find an apartment close to the beach in the R1.8 million-R2.8 million range,” Martle said. There are plenty of security estates, offering a mix of apartments to freestanding homes priced from around R1.8 million to R5 million-R8 million for a luxury home. Atlantic Seaboard – Sea Point and Green Point “On the Atlantic Seaboard, your best gems are Sea Point and Green Point where you can still live the high life, but at more accessible prices,” said Ian Slot, MD for Seeff Atlantic Seaboard, Waterfront and City Bowl. “You are well positioned to the CBD and Waterfront on the one side and the Atlantic Seaboard attractions and beaches to the other side. A big attraction, is the urban vibe and street café culture combined with plenty of green spaces including an urban park, a golf course and the Sea Point Promenade where you can enjoy walking, cycling, the outdoor gym equipment and picnics on the lawn.” Apartment prices range from around R2.2 million-R4.2 million and houses from R6 million-R12 million on average. If the suburbs are more for you, then you can look at the following according to Seeff: Woodstock, Observatory and Salt River Suburban buyers simply cannot go wrong with the Woodstock, Observatory, Salt River area right now according to Seeff agents, Craig Algie and George Clelland. The areas enjoy an excellent proximity to the CBD and Atlantic Seaboard to the one side and Southern Suburbs to the other side. “These have been some of the best capital growth areas with average prices rising on average by about 15%-25% and up to 40% in some instances during the mini-boom phase of 2013-2016. “That said, you can still find excellent value, from older cottages and houses ideal for renovation and upgrading to new developments offering trendy apartments ranging from around R1.2 million (SALT),” Algie said. Pinelands/Thornton For family buyers and professionals, Pinelands and Thornton offer an excellent location and a choice of quality homes in an upper income area with easy access to top class schools. Prices range from around R2.8 million-R3.8 million on average with larger homes ranging from around R4.3 million-R4.8 million. “Many of the solid family homes have a nice garden and swimming pool,” Seeff said. Durbanville Fanie Marais, licensee of Seeff Durbanville said the area is not only central with excellent facilities including top schools, but it offers a peri-urban lifestyle with its own wine valley, rolling vineyards and top wine farms such as Durbanville Hills, D’Aria, Meerendal and Diemersdal. “The area has good access to the N1 and, given its location around the Tygerberg Hills, many homes enjoy fabulous views over the city and property here is an excellent investment. “There is a host of sporting facilities including golfing as well as the large Tygervalley Shopping Mall and many neighbourhood conveniences. You are also close to the Blouberg beaches,” Marais said. Prices are still very accessible, especially in the sectional title sector where you can find a good choice of townhouses in the R1.8 million-R2.8 million range. Read: Cape Town’s best and worst performing suburbs for property growth