The Kerzner family has launched one of the most anticipated developments in Cape Town, the new Kerzner Estate which is set to be one of the most exclusive residential estates in the country, says Seeff Property Group. The 10ha estate is located high on the slopes of Leeukoppie, just off Victoria Road, with views towards Chapman’s Peak, the bay, valley and mountains. The estate offers 48 luxury houses with three, four and five bedrooms, priced from just over R20 million inclusive of VAT with no transfer duty payable. Ross Levin, Seeff Atlantic Seaboard and City Bowl developments director, said that given that this is the Kerzner’s home here in South Africa, this is a project close to their hearts, so much so that this is the first development ever to carry the Kerzner family name. Kerzner bought the original property in 1983 and it has served as his Cape Town home since and is famed for hosting visiting celebrities and delegates and for his New Year’s Eve parties. Read: A first look at Sol Kerzner’s stunning new luxury estate in Cape Town Developed as an eco-estate, each plot is around 1500sqm. The luxury houses feature unique designs with greening elements and the use of natural building materials such as wood and stone, tailored to suit each individual site, all under the careful eye of Sol Kerzner and his daughter, Andrea, said Levin.  In typical Kerzner style, six architectural firms are involved in designing the homes of the first release, the property group said. These include Dennis Fabian from Fabian Architects, who has a long-standing history with Sol Kerzner along with Stefan Antoni from ARRCC, Sean Mahoney from studioMAS, Jonathan Jacobs from Metropolis, Sally Tsiliyiannis from Gapp and Ian Gray from COA (Craft of Architecture). Each home is designed in a manner that it cannot be picked up and placed on any other plot, because the architecture of each home is tailored to the site like a great suit, Seeff said. “This means that every home maximises on the unique features that the particular site has to offer. All houses enjoy air conditioning, fireplaces in the living areas, en-suite bathrooms to every bedroom, provision for grey and rain water harvesting and top of the line finishes.”  House sizes range from 374sqm-738sqm, but there is no one-size-fits-all here and each house will be unique, designed by a different architect to fit the plot perfectly and bring out the best views/features possible. Aside from the architectural designs by some of South Africa’s top architects, the finishes will be of superior quality, Seeff said. This will include EuroCasa Kitchens and Miele Appliances, aspects such as stone and wooden flooring, top quality bathrooms, double glazing, air-conditioning in bedrooms, fireplaces in the living areas, a swimming pool, an allocation for rain water and greywater harvesting and landscaping allowances. One of the core principles that Kerzner built his hospitality success on is to ‘blow the customer away’ and Levin said that the same attention to detail and the highest standards applies to this estate.  The estate will have top security, a fitness centre, and access to a host of Kerzner Hospitality services that residents may want to make use of. The indigenous vegetation of the estate will be restored with fynbos replacing all alien pine trees. It is just a 15-minute drive from the Atlantic Seaboard attractions and Blue Flag beaches and also from the top private schools in the region and in the Southern Suburbs.  Levin says that he expects significant interest in the development to come from buyers within the Cape looking for a luxury security estate home as well as from upcountry areas such as Johannesburg and Pretoria. Read: A look at the insane R18 billion Kerzner-branded hotel development in Dubai