Pan-European distributor Nuvias has formed an exclusive partnership with Hardware Distribution to distribute their products to the Southern Africa channel. “Nuvias ventured with Hardware Distribution to give them presence in Southern Africa because of our long history of customer care and excellence, our experience in the local distribution market, and our solid well-earned reputation,” says Gail Holt, Hardware Distribution Managing Director. Hardware Distribution’s parent company, Hardware Group, is already a close partner of Nuvias Group. A logical extension of that relationship was for Nuvias to collaborate with Hardware Distribution South Africa (HWSA) in Southern Africa. Positive news for the local channel is that Nuvias was recently awarded EMEA distribution rights for Juniper Networks. “We are thrilled to be an official distributor of Juniper in this territory. Nuvias has a substantial inventory in the UK so lead times on workgroup or CPE products are normally 7-10 days,” says Holt, adding that Juniper will be a key focus for Nuvias. Apart from the Juniper distribution, Nuvias has been awarded EMEA distribution rights for a number of exciting technologies, including Malwarebytes, Vasco, and Infocyte in security, and Oracle, Snom, and BlueJeans in the UC space. HWSA is already a skilled networking distributor, so the Nuvias Advanced Networking portfolio that includes vendors such as Juniper is an obvious fit. With HWSA being a long-standing and accomplished Polycom distributor, Nuvias Unified Communication portfolio, which includes Blue Jeans, Lifesize, and Oracle, compliments this from day one. Nuvias will operate as a division of Hardware Distribution, with all Nuvias vendors being marketed under the Nuvias brand. Hardware Distribution continues to supply Polycom, Prolabs, and Opengear, and offers maintenance and repair services for supporting end-of-life Cisco networks. Nuvias is the fastest-growing distributor in Europe and was born through the acquisition of three major IT distributors – Wickhill, Zycko, and Siphon – all of which focused on the distribution of security, storage, networking, voice and video, data center, cloud, and hosted solutions. “Our Nuvias relationship is excellent news for the Southern African market – we are agile, focused, knowledgeable, small enough to really care about our customers, and can now offer more best of breed technologies to our channel partners. We are excited to be working with Nuvias,” concludes Holt.