Homes featuring energy-saving alternatives and greener living solutions are more in demand and are selling at premium prices. This is according to Maryanne Coates of Jawitz Properties, who said that there has been a definite increase in the interest and demand for self-sustainable properties – both from homes that are completely off the grid to those that are partially self-sufficient. The municipal services provided to homes, known as ‘the grid’, include services that homeowners are connected to and pay for, such as water and electricity. Property owners can choose to go completely off-grid by becoming 100% self-sufficient, or partially off the grid by installing energy-efficient and environmentally-friendly solutions. For example, continuing to use the municipal water services provided but generating free electricity through solar panels is going partially off the grid. Living off the grid is an ideal for many South Africans, especially in light of the recent increases in electricity and water tariffs, the scarcity of water and the latest threats of load-shedding, said Coates. “It’s not surprising that this trend is particularly noticeable in the Cape Peninsula,” she said. “The coastal suburb of Noordhoek is known for its free-spirited and nature-loving residents, but there is also a growing crowd of well-to-do’s who have a more holistic view of life that includes living well, living greener, and living off the grid, which may be why the area has become popular with buyers from Gauteng, who are choosing the Peninsula’s lifestyle over that of the suburbs.” Coates points to a luxury home in Noordhoek that has an independent solar energy and water supply system is currently on the market at R13.45 million.   The 5-bedroom home boasts four bathrooms, two garages, a study and a swimming pool – and is completely off the grid. “It features state-of-the-art solar technology with a hybrid inverter that supplies electrical power first from solar energy, then the battery bank and only uses the grid if absolutely necessary. Whereas the independent water system consists of a borehole supply and reservoir, a rain water supply and reservoir and a pressurised water filtration and purification system,” said Coates. “Homeowners that purchase fully or partially off the grid homes not only make a positive impact on the environment but they also provide themselves with a consistent and reliable source of services. “In addition, they save themselves the high monthly costs associated with paying for these services, invest in the future of their homes and save themselves from increasing tariffs in the future. They’re also likely to get a higher price if they sell. It’s a win-win solution that makes environmental sense, but also great property sense,” she said.    Read: At R6.5 billion, this could be the most expensive house in the world