Apple chief operating officer Jeff Williams said the company is taking the Apple Watch to the next level with the newest generation of the device, improving functionality across multiple areas, reported MyBroadband. “Fitness is at the core of Apple Watch, encouraging you to be more active by closing your rings and tracking your workouts,” said Williams. The Watch Series 4 boasts a significantly larger screen, over 30% larger than previous generations, too – and it is also thinner than previous models. Applications have been redesigned to account for the larger display and Apple has also included new customisable watch faces. Various applications have been enhanced for the new device, and the Breathe app is now available as a standalone watch face for the device, synchronising dynamic images with your breathing.  Hardware and features The Apple Watch Series 4’s digital crown now delivers haptic feedback for a better navigation experience, and the speaker is 50% louder than previous-generation devices, said Apple. “Radio waves can now pass through both the front and the back of Series 4, improving cellular reception,” added Williams. Apple’s S4 chipset powers the Series 4, and includes a 64-bit dual-core processor which delivers up to twice the performance of previous chips. The Series 4 also includes a next-generation accelerometer and gyroscope combination, which enables a new feature on the device that allows it to detect when the wearer accidentally falls. Apple studied natural falls and discovered repeatable patterns which can be analysed and diagnosed as a fall by the Series 4 chip. The device also sports three new heart monitoring features, including: Notification when heart rate is too low.
Notification for heart rhythm irregularities.
Added electrodes, allowing users to take an electrocardiogram (ECG). Williams noted that the Apple Watch Series 4 is the first ECG product offered over the counter directly to consumers, and can deliver ECG results in 30 seconds. Read: Buffett says iPhone is ‘enormously underpriced’ after buying more Apple