Malta is a favourite destination for anyone planning to move or invest outside their own country, thanks to its beautiful waters, sunny Mediterranean climate, exceptional lifestyle, vibrant culture, and low cost of living. It offers an attractive standard of living, a stable economy, low crime rate, and excellent healthcare services, while its diverse and active social life caters for all ages – with many cultural events held throughout the year. Malta offers an attractive residence and visa programme, ideal for South African nationals looking to invest in an offshore holiday or retirement place with residency and ease of movement across Europe. As per a recent study by Knight Frank, published by Bloomberg, Malta has a stable property market and offers steady capital growth, as it is the country with the highest residential property price gains in the world – surpassing Hong Kong. According to Frank Salt Real Estate – Malta’s leading estate agents – English is one of the two official languages and almost everyone there can speak English fluently. Another major benefit for South Africans looking to reside in Malta is that driving is on the same side of the road as South Africa. For South Africans interested in investing or moving to Malta or Gozo, Frank Salt Real Estate is hosting its next series of MOVE TO MALTA – investment, residency, and relocation seminars – free of charge. The upcoming seminars will consist of a few short presentations followed by one-on-one sessions with key speakers and their support teams, as well as Frank Salt partner agents in South Africa. The subjects covered will include real estate or investment opportunities and taxation and residence in Malta through presentations by Grahame Salt, a director of Frank Salt Real Estate, together with South African partners who have experienced Malta first hand. Lawyers and residency specialists from Maltese law firm EMD will also be present. The individual sessions are highly recommended as they offer an opportunity to gather exact information related to property investment, taxation, or residency. The 20-minute one-on-one sessions are allocated on a first-come-first-served basis, and refreshments will also be served. Seminars will take place in Durban on 16 October, Cape Town on 18 October, and in Johannesburg on 22 October. To register, or to find out more about the forthcoming Malta residency, investment, and citizenship seminars, visit the Malta residency website. Frank Salt Real Estate is Malta’s largest privately-owned real estate agency and has operated in Malta for 49 years. Not only do they aid in the relocation process, but also offer a vast selection of good-quality commercial, investment, or residential properties. “We have been hosting seminars in South Africa for over 15 years and enjoy a very strong South African client base. We therefore also believe that we are very well positioned to look after all potential clients’ particular requirements, whatever they may be,” said Grahame Salt, director of Frank Salt Real Estate. To find out more about property in Malta, visit the Frank Salt website. If you would like to request a private meeting or have any questions related to the seminars or your booking, you can contact Frank Salt Real Estate on +356 2379 4000 or via email at fs@franksalt.com.mt.      This article was published in partnership with Frank Salt Real Estate Ltd..