Dogon Group Properties has announced that it has broken all its previous rental records for high-end holiday lets in Cape Town with a staggering single rental of just under R1 million for four nights on the Atlantic Seaboard. The booking, which required two luxury homes in Clifton – in one of the most expensive residential streets in South Africa – to accommodate the full group of international holiday makers, cost a total of R960,000. Denise Dogon, CEO of Dogon Group Properties explained that the two villa’s achieved rentals of R130,000 and R110,000 respectively per night in winter which is low season. “This is the highest short-term rental that DG has ever achieved for a four-night stay,” she said. “These Clifton properties are nestled against the slopes of Lion’s Head, in one of the most prime positions in the country, with uninterrupted coastal views and pristine natural landscape. In addition to an almost unsurpassed location, the two properties are truly the epitome of luxury and top-end quality and style,” said Dogon. Dogon is no stranger to record-breaking property deals, having secured the sale of a Bantry Bay home to a German buyer in 2016 for R290 million. The Dogon team also recently secured a long term rental in the Cape for R360,000 per month. General upswing in holiday rentals Dogon confirmed that they have received a number of inquiries for the upcoming festive holiday season, with the Atlantic Seaboard still being the preferred areas, and also fetching the highest rentals. “Constantia has also become a popular area for holiday lets, especially with families from the UK. Most booking enquires average between R20,000 and R30,000 per day,” said Dogon. “In the recent past some of our high profile clients have included celebrities such as Kate Moss and Chinese billionaire Jack Ma.” “There seems to be a real positive energy and resurgence in holiday rentals this year with the rainfall we have had in Cape Town bringing life back to our tourism sector. We are expecting a much better season than last year as the drought affected the rental market and tourists chose other destinations. They now seem to be returning for the upcoming season,” she said. Read: Property firm reveals how many Sandton and Centurion residents are emigrating – and where they are going