Four South African companies feature among the top 100 most diverse workplaces in the world, in the 2018 Thomson Reuters Diversity & Inclusion (D&I) Index. The index highlights global companies that are leading the way in embedding diversity and inclusion into their company strategy, with industries now beginning to recognise the societal and business benefits of investing in diverse and inclusive companies. “We are working closely with various investment firms who are looking to develop investable products based on our D&I index. We remain committed to providing industry-leading ESG data to help investors make smarter investment decisions,” Thompson Reuters said. “Not only have firms been increasing their corporate disclosure with the intent of improving corporate governance and transparency, regulators have also been compelling change and 2019 will see the introduction of the second Shareholder Rights Directive in Europe to this end. “Investors are keen to see much more data related to topics such as diversity to factor these into their ESG strategies, which have been gathering pace over the last 12 months.” Each company is assigned a score across diversity, inclusion, people development and news controversy pillars. Only companies with scores across all four pillars are assigned an overall score (the average of the pillar scores). The top 100 ranked companies with the best overall scores are selected for the Index. In 2018, 52 new companies earned a top 100 spot on the index, while 17 companies remained ranked on the index for two consecutive years, and 12 companies regained a spot on the index. South African companies Four South African companies were ranked among the top 100: Speaking on being ranked in the index, Woolworths CEO, Zyda Rylands said that it was “testament to our commitment to creating an inclusive culture, underpinned by our people and the
Woolies values.” To qualify as diverse and inclusive, the Index looks at various factors, including the make-up of boards along gender and cultural lines (among others); how companies make concessions for employees with disabilities; and how they go about training. It also takes into account wages, working conditions and the number of controversies that emerge in the media.  These are the top 20 most diverse companies in the world.  Read: Woolworths profit drops in ‘disappointing’ results