Employer branding company Universum has published its annual World’s Most Attractive Employers (WMAE) results. Research is conducted using data compiled from more than 225,000 engineering/IT and business students from the world’s 12 largest economies, including China, Japan, South Korea, the UK, and US, who were asked to rank the companies they find the most desirable for employment. Google once again maintained its first place position in both fields of the study. The other most attractive employers for engineering/IT students are Microsoft, Apple, and BMW Group. According to Engineering/IT Students:  Among the business talent, Goldman Sachs, EY (Ernst & Young) and Deloitte are the most attractive employers behind Google. According to Business Students:  For engineering and IT students, the rankings of consulting firms such as BCG, McKinsey, EY and PwC go up drastically compared to last year’s rankings, due to the increasing demand from these companies to undertake digital transformation. Engineering/IT students prefer industries where they can utilise their knowledge and skills the best. The software, computer services, multimedia industries (25%) are the most desired, followed by the aerospace and defence (21%), automotive (17%), technology hardware and equipment (16%), industrial engineering and manufacturing (16%) industries. Business students continue to strive for the management and strategy consulting (27%), financial services (25%) and banks (24%) industries. In China, maintaining work-life balance (54-55%) and job security (44-45%) remain the top two career goals for all young professionals. Work-life balance here embodies a philosophical sense – finding purpose and meaning in life and at work. Instead of prioritising high future earnings such as the European students, Chinese students consider good references for future careers, professional training and development and innovation as the top employer brand attributes, Universum said. As reported in June, Universum listed the companies that South African professionals are most keen to work for. The survey covered a wide range of questions relating to future employment and career goals, as well as other attributes that make an employer attractive, like work-life balance. Universum’s list of most attractive employers in South Africa, as ranked by professionals, includes: Business / Commerce Engineering / Technology Read: Here are the best companies to work for in South Africa in 2018