Friday marks the final day of public hearings by a parliamentary committee around the state’s proposed move to change the Constitution to make land expropriation without compensation the standard in South Africa. Speaking at the hearings, CEO of Nedbank, Mike Brown highlighted a key concern for banks – namely that the move could send South Africa’s banking industry into a crisis if bonded properties are not protected. According to Brown, when bonded property is exporpriated, it is likely to result in a direct impairment of that land on the balance sheet of a bank. If even a small percentage of properties are expropriated, this will result in that bank losing billions of rands, he said. As an example, he said that if 10% of Nedbank’s R153 billion residential mortgage bill was expropriated, it would cost the group R15 billion. With commercial properties at R162 billion and agricultural properties at R17 billion – the risks add up. Brown said that banks would be left with few options to protect capital and depositors, saying that confidence in the country’s banking system was critical, and already investors were starting to raise concerns. According to Brown, during investor road shows, the group would typically spend 20 minutes talking about the state of the country, 10 minutes discussing the state of the South African banking industry, and 30 minutes presenting Nedbank as an investment opportunity. However, because of the uncertainty around land reform, the conversation is now dominated by the state of the country – with the split now being 40 minutes discussing the state of the country, 5 minutes discussing the banking industry and 15 minutes presenting Nedbank. “Sometimes investors only want to talk about South Africa and the entire hour is used to talk about the state of the country,” Brown said.  No need to change the Constitution Also speaking at the hearings, the Banking Association of South Africa, representing all the country’s banks, also warned of the risks involved with government’s plans. The group said that banks have invested over R1.6 trillion into property loans in the country, and that and these are the investments of depositors – the people of South Africa. BASA said that expropriation without compensation would undermine private property rights, and denying South Africans the right to private property would have a devastating effect. It also said that there was no need to change the Constitution, as it already makes provision for land expropriation. Property panic BASA and Brown’s comments come after widespread panic among home-owners after a Nedbank client was told that they are contractually mandated to pay off their bond “irrespective of land expropriation”. In a statement clarifying the bank’s position following the uproar, the group called for calm and said that there is still no clarity on what exactly government’s plans are, and the debate is ongoing, so the message was to keep paying your bond until there is some direction. “The land debate itself has already had a negative impact on overall investor sentiment and, therefore, economic activity and job creation. But, so far, it has not yet directly affected Nedbank or the way we assess credit for our clients,” the group said. “We fully support the democratic process and land reform debate and the need for historical redress, but it is vital that this sensitive and important issue is handled properly to ensure no lasting impact on economic growth and food security. “Any proposed changes of Section 25 of the Constitution will still need to be fully debated and will have to pass constitutional and legal muster on multiple fronts. The actual wording of any proposed changes will be absolutely vital and would need to be assessed before any economic and credit assessment impacts can be determined.” Nedbank said that it would be wise to wait for the process to play out, rather than pre-empt it without the detail. “We do not support a change to Section 25 of the Constitution, as this already provides for expropriation without compensation in cases where a court holds this to be just and equitable or it is in the national interest.” Amid reports of attempted illegal occupancy and some renters refusing to pay rent, president Cyril Ramaphosa said that the government’s plan is not to facilitate illegal land grabs or threaten used or occupied land. Read: South African land reform may allow for compensation: ANC