A luxurious five-storey residential real estate set high on the mountainside in the Cape Town Atlantic Seaboard suburb of Llandudno goes under the hammer this weekend, 15 September, 2018. The property is being auctioned by instruction as a core asset of an insolvent estate and will have a R10 million opening bid. “The Kruger Roos-designed villa is one of the most magnificent in a suburb of extraordinary properties. Situated at 38 Fisherman’s Bend, Llandudno, it is a north-facing, five level home of 1,000m², with magnificent sea views of the Atlantic, the 12 Apostles and Klein Leewkoppie throughout,” said High Street Auctions lead auctioneer and director, Joff van Reenen. “The villa itself comprises five large en-suite bedrooms, all with panoramic sea views and luxurious living spaces, as well as a separate flatlet and triple garaging. All floors are accessed via two internal staircases and the house boasts a triple volume entrance. “The vertical façade of the structure allows for a house with unobstructed sea views and an unparalleled sense of privacy.” Van Reenen noted that the two lower floors are occupied by the garages, the self-contained flatlet, a utility room, gym with shower facilities and an office. The third floor is a dramatic atrium structure built around a grassed courtyard and comprises a large entrance lounge with vaulted ceiling and gas fireplace, an eat-in wine cellar a triple volume main lounge and a large luxury family kitchen with Smeg gas oven and fridge, as well as a scullery, he said. The top two floors comprise the en-suite bedrooms; those on the fifth floor boasting their own gas fireplaces. “Llandudno is the place people buy when they want absolute privacy. There are no commercial entities in the secluded hillside suburb and it has no immediate neighbours, but it is very convenient because myriad shops, restaurants and entertainment opportunities are five minutes away by car in Hout Bay. “Llandudno Beach is arguably also one of the most beautiful in the world and with the suburb just 18km from the V&A Waterfront and the CBD along two of the most scenic drives in the world, it ranks among the most desirable locations to be found anywhere,” Van Reenen said.    Read: These are the 10 richest cities and areas in South Africa