Smartphone maker Apple, on Wednesday, announced the iPhone Xs and iPhone Xs Max, its most advanced iPhones yet. The 5.8-inch iPhone Xs and 6.5-inch iPhone Xs Max feature Super Retina displays, a faster and improved dual camera system, the first 7-nanometer chip in a smartphone — the A12 Bionic chip with next-generation Neural Engine — faster Face ID, wider stereo sound, and a Dual SIM introduction to the iPhone. “iPhone Xs is packed with next-generation technologies and is a huge step forward for the future of the smartphone. Everything is state of the art including the industry-first 7-nanometer A12 Bionic chip with 8-core Neural Engine, faster Face ID and an advanced dual camera system that shoots Portrait mode photos with Smart HDR and dynamic depth of field,” said Philip Schiller, Apple’s senior vice president of Worldwide Marketing. “iPhone Xs is not one, but two new iPhone models, and iPhone Xs Max offers the biggest display ever in an iPhone with the biggest battery ever in an iPhone, delivering up to an hour and a half more battery life in your day.” The iPhone Xs and iPhone Xs Max build on the all-screen design of iPhone X and feature the sharpest displays with the highest pixel density of any Apple device, the group said.  Now offered in 5.8-inch and 6.5-inch sizes, these Super Retina displays with a custom OLED design support Dolby Vision and HDR10 and have iOS system-wide color management for the best color accuracy in the industry, Apple said. The iPhone Xs Max delivers a more immersive experience with over 3 million pixels for videos, movies and games, offering the largest display ever in an iPhone in a footprint similar to iPhone 8 Plus. The 5.8-inch and 6.5-inch Super Retina displays are the sharpest with the highest pixel density of any Apple device, the group said. “The Apple-designed A12 Bionic, the smartest and most powerful chip in a smartphone, features the first 7-nanometer chip ever in a smartphone that delivers industry-leading performance in a more power-efficient design. “A12 Bionic features a six-core fusion architecture with two performance cores that are up to 15% faster, four efficiency cores that are up to 50 percent more efficient, a four-core GPU that is up to 505 faster, powerful Apple-designed Image Signal Processor (ISP), video encoder and more.”  A fast storage controller can deliver iPhone storage up to 512GB. “Even with all this power, iPhone Xs offers 30 minutes longer than iPhone X, and iPhone Xs Max offers an hour and a half longer than iPhone X, between charges,” Apple said. The next-generation Neural Engine is built for advanced machine learning in everything from photography to augmented reality. “A new eight-core design allows it to complete up to 5 trillion operations per second compared to 600 billion in A11 Bionic.” Apple said that the iPhone Xs and iPhone Xs Max come with iOS 12, the world’s most advanced mobile operating system. “iOS 12 introduces new AR experiences, helps people rediscover and share photos, and makes communications more expressive and fun with new Animoji and Memoji. “Screen Time helps customers understand and take control of the time they spend interacting with their iOS devices, Siri Shortcuts give any app the ability to work with Siri and new privacy features help protect users from being tracked on the web.” Read: New Apple Watch Series 4 has a larger screen