Recommendations set out in a recent UK Migration Advisory Committee (MAC) report – along with the looming Brexit – could bring very welcome news for non-EU citizens who are looking for opportunities to live and work in the UK. This is according to Breytenbachs Immigration Consultants, which noted that the committee has recommended that free movement for EU citizens should end after Brexit. It also recommended that the current Tier 2 Immigration route be expanded to also include medium-skilled workers to the UK. “The expansion of the Tier 2 immigration route, together with the ending of free movement for EU citizens in the UK, will of course bring welcome news for non-EU citizens,” Breytenbachs said. “Not only will more immigration options be available, but the ending of free movement, will result in more job opportunities opening up for non-EU citizens,” it said. Advisory committee Breytenbachs noted that if the UK Government does not offer concessions to EU workers as part of the Brexit deal, the MAC’s recommendations for work migration post-Brexit in 2021 will probably be implemented in some form. This is highly likely as the UK Cabinet has unanimously supported an immigration system based on skills rather than nationality on 25 September 2018, it said. It added that EU workers will thus face the same immigration rules as non-EU workers. The recommendations proposed by the MAC include: No free movement for future EU workers. They will be treated in the same way as non-EU workers currently are in terms of immigration status.
No low-skilled worker schemes will be created. The only exception is the Seasonal Agricultural scheme that comes into operation in the British Spring of 2019.
No changes to how the current Tier 2 Intra Company transfer route works.
The Tier 2 visa cap to be removed.
Medium-skilled jobs to be included in the Tier 2 Skilled worker route. Jobs at RQF Level 3, 4 and 5 and 6.
The minimum salary threshold of £30,000 to be retained for all Tier 2 jobs.
The Resident Labour Market Test for Tier 2 Skilled Workers to be abolished.
Tier 2 workers will be able to change employer in-country. “Breytenbachs urges EU citizens who are eligible to apply for Permanent Residence to submit their Indefinite Leave to Remain application without delay. “This way they can apply for British citizenship straight away. They should also apply for Permanent Residence or British Citizenship for their children,” it said. It added that it welcomed the proposed expansion of the Tier 2 immigration route to include medium-skilled workers. “This will bring about many opportunities for non-EU citizens to live and work in the UK,” it said. Read: South Africa to pilot e-Visa system in New Zealand