Nedbank has partnered with Mastercard to launch Qkr! with Masterpass – a mobile order-ahead and payment platform developed by Mastercard Labs. The Qkr! (pronounced Quicker) payments platform, allows consumers to order and pay for goods and services via their smartphone without having to wait in line or for a restaurant server. Consumers can also order goods ahead of time to be collected later – skipping queues and wait times – or even have these delivered, Nedbank said. Furthermore, Qkr! makes it possible for diners to quickly order and easily split the payment for their restaurant bills without adding to the administrative burden of the establishment. This is done by using Masterpass to speed up the checkout process without requiring consumers to enter their financial and shipping information at every new merchant site. “Today, we’re looking for convenience in all parts of our lives,”  said Mark Elliott, division president of Mastercard Southern Africa. “Though grab-and-go retail is becoming increasingly popular with those on the move, consumers maintain high customer service expectations. Qkr! with Masterpass provides them with a frictionless retail experience – bringing together self-service, fast, seamless payments and card safety and security in new ways.” Elliot said that Qkr! will also benefit businesses thanks to innovative push technology that makes marketing, promotions and customer engagement easy and effective. The platform’s web-based, self-service portal can be integrated to the retailer’s POS (point of sale) system, helping them to view and manage menus, product inventory and pricing, while providing access to rich, reporting information in real time. Retailers who already have their own mobile app can easily integrate Qkr! APIs and incorporate Qkr! functionality into their own apps, he said. POSplus On Friday (7 September), the bank also launched its new Nedbank POSplus offering as part of their efforts to open up new revenue channels for merchants. The new POSplus solution is an improved physical POS device that allows for acceptance of Mastercard, Visa, Amex payment cards. POSplus also can generate a Masterpass Quick Response (QR) code, enabling consumers to securely and conveniently pay with any payment card loaded in the Zapper or Masterpass app by scanning the QR code with their smartphones. “It also links to a full-function online business management portal. This allows merchants to manage stock and suppliers, promote products, issue and redeem vouchers, and even design and deliver a fully-fledged ecommerce store complete with customer engagement and loyalty programmes,” explained Dayalan Govender, managing executive of Card, Payments and Transactional for Nedbank Retail and Business Banking. Read: A warning to South Africa’s big four banks – competition is coming