New World Wealth has reviewed the best car brands to own in South Africa, based on the affordability of maintaining these vehicles over the long-term. The advisory group said it considered over 30 car brands for this study. “We included all major car brands available in SA,” it said, using the following criteria: Availability and affordability of spare parts for vehicle.
Affordability of services after motor plan has ended.
Reliability of car after motor plan has ended. Special focus on number of major engine and gearbox problems that vehicle experiences over time.
Ability of dealerships to handle large repair jobs and affordability of such repairs.
Affordability of insurance premiums, relative to price of vehicle. Top 5 for 2018 (in no particular order): Toyota Honda Opel  Nissan  Mazda  The wealth group conducted interviews with independent second hand car dealers, independent auto mechanics, and “roadworthy vehicle inspection” providers. It also tracked old (25 years+) vehicles currently on the road which are still in good working order and assessed complaints and compliments online. “If one looks at the number of old (25 year+) cars on SA roads Toyota dominates – a large number of Cressidas, Conquests and Corollas from the 1970s and 1980s are still on the road. This shows that these cars are relatively easy to maintain and cheap to repair. It also shows that they give relatively few problems over the long term,” New World Wealth said. It said it also looked at 20 local car insurers, rating them according to the following criteria: Affordability of premiums
Level of customer service
Speed of payout
Ease of payout process (paperwork etc.)
Roadside assistance and towing Top 5 for 2018 (in no particular order): Discovery
Hollard
Auto & General
Outsurance
King Price The group conducted interviews with with financial intermediaries, and tow truck drivers, while also tracking complaints and compliments online. NWW found that around four million (35%) of the 12 million registered cars in SA are insured, while car insurance premiums normally range from R400 to R600 per month for a car worth R200,000. Read: These are South Africa’s best cars in 2018 – according to affordability and style