The world’s best business schools for budding entrepreneurs have been published by QS World University Rankings, through its Global MBA 2019 list. Business school analysts at Quacquarelli Symonds (QS) placed Stanford Graduate School of Business at the top of the list, with four out of the top five schools being located in the United States. London Business School is placed fourth. QS said its rankings cover the post-graduate programs most in-demand among employers around the world. “QS Rankings seek to measure the key missions of Business Schools, whilst also taking into account what matters most to prospective students,” said Nunzio Quacquarelli, founder of QS. The core indicators are: employability, entrepreneurship & alumni outcomes, return on investment, thought leadership and class and faculty diversity. Stanford University’s Graduate Business School performed particularly well in terms of entrepreneurship & alumni outcomes, as well as thought leadership. Six of the top ten MBA providers are based in the United States with all of them performing well in terms of employability and thought leadership. However, US MBA programs perform less well in terms of return on investment. On a country basis, MBA providers in Germany, Spain, Hong Kong, and Singapore show significant year-on-year progress, the report said. The University of Stellenbosch Business School (USB) has been ranked as the top business school in South Africa, and second in Africa, behind the American University in Cairo – School of Business. Two South African-based institutions are on the list, including the Graduate School of Business at the University of Cape Town. The former is an 11-month course “suited for those who want to further their education, or who are undergoing a career change”. Included in the MBA program experience is a compulsory international study module at a foreign business school to enhance students’ international exposure, QS said. It noted that the average class size is 32, while the average working experience is nine years, and the average age of a student is also 32. For the University of Cape Town, the average age is 26, while the class size is 53, QS said.