There are so many ways to prepare for an interview and set yourself up for success, says recruitment specialist, Glassdoor. With the growing volume of candidates applying for jobs, the high cost of turnover, and the war for great talent, recruitment teams are doing whatever they can to separate the best candidates from the best-practiced candidates. Sometimes, this means throwing a hilarious curveball question your way. To get some real-time data on what’s really going on in interviews, Glassdoor took to social media platforms to ask: “What’s the most fun question you’ve ever been asked in an interview?” Here are real, true responses from professionals across industries around the world: If you turned around and in the doorway was a penguin with a mustache, wearing a big sombrero and poncho, what do you think the penguin would say? -Medical School Resident
What’s your spirit animal? -Government Employee
If a lion and a tiger fought, who would win and why? -Lawyer
If your neighbor asked your child to supervise a pool party at their house, would you let your child go? -Lawyer
What would you do if you found an elephant in your backyard? -Management Student
What would you name this painting and why (Referencing an abstract painting on the wall)? -Insurance Underwriter
How do you fit a giraffe in a fridge? -Lawyer
If you were a movie character, who would you be and why? -Network Administrator
What would you want your title to be when you retire? -Engineer
Describe how you would make me a sandwich. -HR Professional
Why are manholes round? -Firefighter
When was a time you lied and got away with it? -Flight Attendant
How much would you charge to clean all the windows in Chicago? -Doctor
If you don’t get this job what’s your backup plan? -Sales Rep
If you were a flower, what kind would you be and why? -HR Professional
What were you like in high school? -HR Professional
Would you be comfortable working in a hospital, since you were born in one? -Social Worker
Are you a superstar? -Marketing Professional So what really is the point of asking questions that have no objectively correct answer? In short, hiring managers want to see what you’re like unscripted. While they can easily assess your skills by examining your past projects and experiences, it can be challenging to get to know you as a person and get a sense of your compatibility with a team, Glassdoor said. Since the rest of an interview can be fairly easy for to prepare for, organizations want to see how you think through problems and approach abstract situations. For example in question 7, “How do you fit a giraffe in a fridge?”, asking questions like “What kind of fridge”, or “What age is the giraffe”, would show the interviewer that you’re able to connect concepts and ideas, and think outside the box. Is there a great deal of validity to this method? Probably not. However, this is a great opportunity for you show the hiring managers just how funny, cool, and creative you can be, the jobs specialist said. The worst thing you can do in a situation like this is to respond by saying “I don’t know” or by getting flustered. The next time you hear one of these questions, rather than freak out over the absurdity, take a beat, think logically, and remember that there is no right or wrong answer, only an opportunity to stand out from the crowd, Glassdoor said. Read: 10 ways to make your CV stand out to land that job