The landscape of photography has changed drastically in the past hundred years. Once an art reserved to a specific elite, photography has become an essential mean through which we tell our stories. The advent of smartphones brought on a new era in photography; people use pictures as a universal language to communicate, express their emotions and share what matters to them. From what they love, to the places they visit, the moments they cherish, the things the find beautiful, inspiring, funny or appetizing, people tell their lives and document their moments. Given this trend, smartphones manufacturers have relentlessly worked to design sophisticated smartphone cameras to cater to consumers’ growing needs. A leader in smartphone cameras, Huawei invests its R&D resources and works with market leaders to push the boundaries of smartphone photography. The company established a long-term partnership with Leica, the leader in the world of imaging for more than 10 years, to engineer the best, innovative cameras in the market. The Huawei P9 Series saw the birth of the first dual camera setup co-engineered with Leica, and today Huawei releases a photography monster that sets a new benchmark for smartphone photography, the Huawei P20 Pro. The Huawei P20 Pro is the world’s first smartphone featuring a Leica triple camera that comprises a 40 MP RGB sensor with f, a 20 MP monochrome sensor and a 8 MP sensor with telephoto lens. The device also sports wide apertures of f/1.8, f/1.6 and f/2.4 to capture pictures with sharp and clear details. With its groundbreaking design, the Huawei P20 Pro achieved the highest score in history of well-known camera review website DxOMark. The Huawei P20 Pro uses Artificial AI Image Stabilization technology to capture blur-free, clear pictures and video footage of moving objects taken on handheld devices. This technology steadies handheld night shots for incredible long exposure images without a tripod. Powered by the powerful Kirin 970, the Huawei P20 Series identifies more than 500 scenarios in 18 categories, and automatically adjust the camera parameters to deliver the most perfect picture in any setting. The 24MP front camera allows to capture the smallest details, even in dim light, using AI beautification to provide 3D portrait lighting and make adjustments for delicately outlined face shapes, luminous skin tone adjustments and radiant selfies. While smartphone cameras struggle with low-light photography, the Huawei P20 Pro comes to defy the norms. The 40MP sensor on the Huawei P20 Pro allows for clearer pictures with the most vibrant colors and details. The Huawei P20 Pro delivers better detail and lower noise levels, making it the smartphone of choice for any kind of photo or video shooting in low-light and indoor environments. Huawei’s Hybrid Zoom technology isn’t brand new; it was used in previous flagships like the Huawei Mate 9, the Huawei P10 and the Huawei Mate 10. Therefore, the Huawei P20 Pro is the first Huawei smartphone to use a brand new 3x telephoto (VARIO-SUMMILUX-H 1:1.6-2.4/27-80ASPH) lens to enhance its zoom capabilities up to 5 times and capture beautiful shots with vivid colors and clear details. If you’re looking for a revolutionary smartphone camera that will capture breathtaking pictures, the Huawei P20 Pro will get you covered! This article was published in partnership with Huawei.