Commercial real estate company Cushman & Wakefield has released a new report on the major developments taking place in South Africa. This includes the development of five new mega-city projects which are expected to fundamentally change the face of Gauteng. “Each mega city includes massive infrastructure development with immense residential, commercial, industrial components while featuring schools, universities, hospitals and transport hubs. The five biggest are each located on one of Gauteng’s major corridors. “They represent a paradigm shift away from sporadic and uncoordinated developments to purposely planned and developed Mega Cities that are completely self sufficient in providing for the housing, economic and social needs of the community,” the report said. These five biggest cities include: Cullinan Mega City
Daggafontein Mega City
Goudrand Mega City
John Dube Mega City
Stinkwater Mega City According to Cushman & Wakefield,  each project will be different, but some common features include both free-standing and multi-story residential walk-ups, gas reticulation systems, renewable energy, solid waste and waste water recycling, and connectivity. Cushman & Wakefield said that the majority of developments should have begun development by early 2018. It outlined the five developments and what to expect from them below: Cullinan Mega City Location: Cullinan; 45km east of Pretoria CBD; 2km from the Cullinan CBD and 4km from the Cullinan Diamond Mine.
Size: 180ha What to expect: Dynamic modern mixed-use new-town development with a range of housing types aimed at a socio-economically stratified market requiring a diverse product mix and unique settlement form. The development includes public facilities, open space and commercial business activities. Walkability and public transport usage will play an important role in the offering. More than 5,000 housing opportunities are expected.  Daggafontein Mega City Location: Springs; adjacent Edelweiss Extension; 50km east of Johannesburg CBD
Size: 750ha What to expect: The development includes 17,000 housing units of which 15,511 units will be subsidised. The units, with potential for owners to expand, will be surrounded by parks with open-air training facilities, smart street lights, free access to fibre optic internet connections, free public wi-fi connection, a solar farm as well as medical, retail and education developments.  Goudrand Mega City Location: Randfontein Road/Main Reef Road (K198); 50km west of Johannesburg CBD.
Size: to be confirmed What to expect: The first phase of the development is a mixed-use project comprising of 13,197 housing opportunities, five educational sites, three shopping centre sites, seven crèche sites, eight worship sites, a hospital, a cemetery and municipal sites. The whole development should account for between 20,000 and 25,000 housing opportunities.  John Dube Mega City Location: Nigel; 65km south-east of Johannesburg CBD.
Size: 497ha What to expect: The aim of the project will be to maximise the unit yield while remaining environmentally sustainable and cost-effective. For the sake of quality space and liveability, a balance will be struck to meet the end-user needs in the light of all project constraints. The development will include public facilities and other amenities with emphasis on non-motorised transport throughout the development. It is anticipated that there will be a mix of visitors and residents, and dynamic movements of people throughout the area during the day, week, and over weekends.  Stinkwater Mega City Location: Zandkop Zyn Laagte; Stinkwater; 60km north of Pretoria CBD.
Size: 415ha What to expect: The development will include 9,495 housing units with provision for a wide variety of ownership options as well as business developments, churches, schools, creches and several parks. It is estimated that about 20,000 jobs will be created. Read: This 5-star Cape Town hotel is being turned into luxury apartments – going for up to R16 million