Security, insurance and car tracking companies regularly publish new hijacking statistics detailing which areas and roads are the worst affected. While the majority of experts agree that the trends themselves don’t change, there are questions as to whether hijackers are making use of the same data to target areas which were previously seen as ‘safer’. This was a question raised this past week after Arrive Alive approached colleagues from the vehicle tracking and security companies for updates on the latest statistics. While the companies were happy to provide the data, one of the tracking businesses noted that it had recently seen some different hijacking points and were wondering if its stats impact on this. “In other words, do these thugs learn from our stats?”  Speaking to BusinessTech, Arrive Alive’s Adv. Johan Jonck confirmed that at least one of the tracking companies (who preferred not to be mentioned by name) said that the hijacking hotspots have shifted. “This is indeed an interesting point of discussion and we could ask the public to comment,” he said. “Is it that criminals also follow these alerts, or is it merely that they believe lightning don’t strike twice at the same spot?” Jonck noted that the crimes are still a very real threat and it was important for Arrive Alive to focus on sharing information on hijack avoidance advice and on the need for alertness at all times. “Also interesting that the public often say that there should be no need for signs of ‘hotspots’ as it begs the question why don’t we do something in those areas by way of improved enforcement,” he said. “In the past we have shared info on a specific incident at a smash and grab hotspot at Fountains in Pretoria – and found a perpetrator shot through active enforcement about a week late at that location.” Arrive Alive also noted that it may also not be such a bad idea to find that these ‘hotspots’ have moved. It could be that these criminals may: Have been informed that the area is regarded as a high-risk area.
Could be expecting increased enforcement in the area once such an area is identified as a ‘hotspot’.
Observed motorists to be more vigilant and aware of their surroundings. Read: New details in deadly Uber self-driving car crash