With the average house price in South Africa now having surpassed the R1 million mark, it has become increasingly difficult for South Africans to climb onto the property ladder. This has led to an increase in innovative micro-apartments and container homes – smaller re-purposed accommodation typically a fraction of the cost, with some even offering off-the-grid living. While a few of these developments have been well publicised, including the Drive Lines apartment block in the Maboneng Precinct in Johannesburg, other options can be delivered directly to your door. Umnyama Ikhaya  specialises in off-grid container homes which can be transported to any address in South Africa. Once delivered the container will form part of your title deed and can be resold via normal mortgage/bond finance. “We guarantee council approval at R8,500 for the 30 square metre structure and if not we will refund you. This fee is for the detailed architectural plans, energy efficiency compliancy and council submissions,” said company founder, John Venter. According to Venter, buyers can decided between a two or four sleeper floor plan, both of which are available as a 30 square metre pod for R399,000 (excluding the cost of land). “This price includes transport to site anywhere in South Africa, and a full inventory. We can however, build any size structure by joining our modular blocks side by side or stacking using our DIY boltfast system, including optional extras such as a garage, storage room and even a second-storey,” he said.   Inside The following items are included as part of the standard inventory for each home. Venter pointed out that the home is completely off-grid and features no electricity bills and a number of water saving features. “The idea of the home is that we deliver it and it just ‘turns on’ and can immediately be used,” he said. Hydrofire fireplace
Cooling fan
4 x Solar Panels
4 x Solar Batteries
5kw Inverter
Bosch fridge/freezer
Bosch gas stove/oven
 Bosch 11 litre gas heating system
LED television
Wall bracket
Fire extinguisher
Double glazed pvc & steel windows/ oor
5cm Thick fire retardant polystyrene insulation with chromadek panels
Exterior cladding in NUTEC – finish and colour of your choice.
Rust treated and painted
2 x Interior sliding doors
Rainwater tank 5,000 litres
Rainwater harvesting roof – Zincalume
Solar pressure pump
Floating shelf
Waterless extracting dehydration toilet – odourless system
Vertical farming façade for veggies, herbs or flowers.
Towel rail
Mirror
Soap holder
LED interior lighting all round
Motion sensor exterior lighting
Dry walling used for partitioning
Fully finished bathroom with shower
Fully fitted kitchen
Fully fitted bedroom with cupboards
DB electrical switch board
Marine grade 10mm corten steel, modular building block     Read: You can buy a container home in SA for as little as R100,000