In the aftermath of numerous ransomware threats to hit ict networks across the globe, it has become vital for every enterprise network security professional to implement comprehensive layers of defence within their enterprise architecture. “One of the biggest challenges in today’s enterprise solutions landscape is to access real end -to -end turnkey solutions for your business” according to Pinnacle Chief Technical Officer Johan Lötter. “It is for this exact reason that we at Pinnes established a world class enterprise product stable focussing heavily on hyperconverged infrastructure. Through our various interactions with our clients in this space we soon realised that we needed an additional element to complete our end-to-end offering and so we were able to source a reliable and comprehensive firewall solution called Hillstone Networks.” Pinnacle is therefore pleased to confirm our partnership with Bitrate who will enable us to distribute the Hillstone Network E-Series of firewall solutions to our clients who require from the most basic architecture to absolute carrier grade. Their next generation firewall provides visibility and control of web applications regardless of port, protocol, or evasive action. Hillstone Network’s E-series can identify and prevent potential threats associated with high-risk applications while providing policy-based control over applications, users, and user-groups. Policies can be defined that guarantee bandwidth to mission-critical applications while restricting or blocking inappropriate or malicious applications. Hillstone E-Series firewalls also incorporate comprehensive network security and advanced firewall features. They also provide superior price performance, excellent energy efficiency and is of a smaller size when compared to competing products. Lötter adds that: “ Pinnacle is proud to be associated with an award winning provider that was recently awarded the winner in the 14th annual 2018 Info Security PG’s Global Excellence Awards® in Most Innovative Security Product (Hardware) of the year; CloudView – winner in network security and management and CloudEdge, – winner in cloud security. “These prestigious global awards recognise cybersecurity and information technology vendors with advanced, ground-breaking products, solutions, and services that help set the bar higher in all areas of security and technology”. This article was published in partnership with Pinnacle Africa.