Following recent comments by Australian home affairs minister Peter Dutton, Australia’s attorney general Christian Porter has confirmed that he would back special visas for South African farmers. “More than any other place in Australia, South Africans have made their home in the north coast of Wester Australia, in my electorate,” Porter told the Australian. “They are hardworking and make a huge contribution to our local community.” He added that over the past five years his office had helped a steady stream of South Africans with immigration issues. “I have always thought that, given their contribution, the more South Africans in our local community the better,” the attorney-general said. “If anyone in Pearce needs any assistance with relatives back in South Africa who are potential candidates for visa classes based on any form of persecution, or any other visa class for that matter, please contact my office and we will continue to provide every assistance.” Continued push from Australia At the beginning of April, Australian Home Affairs minister Peter Dutton stated that he was now actively considering “several” applications from South African farmers for refugee or humanitarian status in Australia. Dutton caused an international uproar in March when he announced that the country is considering fast-tracking visas for white South African farmers. This led to the issuing of a diplomatic démarche by International Relations and Cooperation Minister Lindiwe Sisulu to the Australian High Commissioner, in which she demanded a retraction of the comments made by Dutton on the South African land redistribution process. The issue appeared resolved after Sisulu announced that the Australia had apologised and issued a retraction of the statement, but Dutton has indicated to Australian media that this was not the case and reiterated that he would not back down following growing concerns with the country. He said that the Australian government’s position remained as it was, and that the refugee and humanitarian programme was still available to eligible people. Read: How much UK, US, Australian and other popular visas will cost South Africans in 2018