Tech-focused holding company 4Sight has acquired AccTech Systems and its subsidiary Dynamics Africa Services for a combined R150 million, the group announced. The group first noted its plans to acquire the companies earlier this week. According to 4Sight, the buyout of AccTech and Dynamics Africa Services – an independent software vendor (ISV) that focuses on Microsoft Dynamics NAV (formerly Navision) and GP (formerly Great Plains) Enterprise solutions – is an integral step in realising the group’s strategic vision. “Our objective is to provide industry 4.0-related solution services and implement relevant end-to-end technology stacks across key industry verticals, to help companies visualise, digitise, analyse, and optimise their data, systems and operations,” it said. Since its inception in 1994, AccTech has become a leading provider of enterprise applications such as Enterprise Resource Planning (ERP), Customer Relationship Management (CRM), Human Resource (HR), Business Process Management (BPM) and Business Intelligence (BI). Before the advent of cloud computing, these enterprise applications were provisioned on-premise and in silos. However, the digitisation of platforms, communications, systems, services and processes now necessitates the seamless integration of technology stacks, the group said. As one of the largest Value Added Resellers (VAR) for the Microsoft Dynamics channel in the Middle-East and Africa (MEA), with a strong footprint in the Southern African Development Community (SADC) region, Dynamics Africa Systems is ideally positioned to enable enterprise cloud migration on the world’s most pervasive software platform. The ISV manages all transactions, on-boarding and licensing for Microsoft on behalf of its channel partners in Africa, positioning it as a key digital transformation enabler for hosted Microsoft Dynamics environments. The companies have a presence in 15 countries, servicing 1,200 customers and over 43,000 users across Africa. Following the acquisition, AccTech will be better positioned to integrate client systems with other industry 4.0 solutions and services offered within the 4Sight Holdings group of companies, the group said. AccTech was acquired for R120 million, while Dynamics Africa Systems was purchased for R30 million. The two companies became subsidiaries of 4Sight as of 1 April 2018. Read: JSE-listed 4Sight in talks to purchase AccTech Systems