Following the approval of Johannesburg’s Spatial Development Framework 2040, the Department of Development Planning and Urban Management has called for public comment on two proposed policies which are expected to drastically alter how the city will operate over the next 20 years. The first policy, ‘the draft nodal review’, outlines the the process that was followed in reviewing the nodes in the city, and describes a new ‘transect’ or ‘development zone’ approach. It also indicates the development guidelines that should be applied in each of the development zones of the city – including everything from changes to buildings to possible changes in street layouts. The second policy is focused on inclusionary housing incentives, and is aimed at making housing in the city more easily accessible for a larger part of the population. “This is something that everyone should be interested in and participate in. It lays the foundation for future of our city and decides what development will take place in the different areas of the city for the next two decades and beyond,” said Elaine Jack, city improvement district manager of Sandton’s Central Management District. “The purpose of this exercise by the city is to ensure development that is holistic and sustainable,” she said. “The draft development framework has been crafted for positive social, environmental and economic impacts. “It is designed to address inequality and inefficiency in the city. In short, it aims to make the city even more equitable, liveable, resilient, efficient and productive. We are fully in support of this. Everyone should be part of this process to optimise its results,” she said. Both policies as well as instructions on how to comment on them are available on the JICP’s website here. Nodal review  Part of the draft nodal review includes a break down of how each area (node) of Johannesburg could change under the policy. These include a full development vision and guidelines for each of the development zones proposed – including the city-centre, suburbs and even the city’s parklands. One of the key aims is to make Joburg CBD a vibrant and walkable area, with a focus on public transit, rather than transport by car. Limitations will be set on building heights, while the city will discourage boundary walls to encourage pedestrian traffic. In addition, underground or back of building parking will be promoted, and when above ground, floor street edges must be active (shops, offices, etc.). For open parking lots, permeable paving should be used. Similar standards have been set for residential areas with the policy discouraging boundary walls, but promoting surveillance of the street, and visually permeable fences where in place. The review also notes that suburban residences should be far away from street boundary where possible, and that any permeable paving should be used for any open parking lots. Inclusionary housing The intention of this policy is to define incentives, mechanisms and regulations for inclusionary housing in Johannesburg. As previously highlighted in an analysis by Cliffe Dekker Hofmeyr’s Joloudi Badenhorst, the draft policy defines ‘inclusionary housing’ as a housing programme that requires private developers to let a certain percentage of new housing developments to low income and low-middle income households at an affordable cost. “Inclusionary housing is to be mandatory for any development in the City of Johannesburg which consists of 10 or more dwelling units,” Badenhorst said. “It requires that a minimum of 20% of the dwelling units developed must constitute inclusionary housing units. “The requirement for inclusionary housing will be embodied as a condition for the approval of the relevant development by COJ and will find application in perpetuity or until removed by COJ by resolution,” she said. You can find the full list of changes and requirements here. Read: Johannesburg announces plans to revamp licence centres – including opening on Saturdays