If you want to be a great, memorable candidate when interviewing for a job, you need to ask some ‘wow’-inducing questions at your interview, says recruitment firm Michael Page. Remember, your competitors will be asking questions about the role, KPIs etc and you want your questions to stand out. You should ask questions that are very well-researched, detailed and unique and that show your enthusiasm and work ethic, Micheal Page said. I understand that this role will consist of ____. Ideally, what would you like me to accomplish for you in the first year in the role? “This shows enthusiasm, positivity and an understanding of the role. It also shows that you have prepared for the interview.” From what you know about me so far, how well do you think I will fit into the team here? Why? “Asking about the team shows that you understand the importance of settling well into the team you’ll be working with. It also shows that you’re aware of the importance of team work and office culture. Hopefully, the answer will be positive and if the interviewer isn’t sure, it’ll give you the chance to show them that you do possess the right qualities.” This is a good opportunity to assess how the interview is going and put your interviewers at ease if they have any doubts, Michael Page said. I am aware that employees have recently done presentations at ___ conference. Is that a typical opportunity in the job for which I am interviewing? “This shows eagerness and an interest in going above and beyond your day-to-day work. It also shows that you have done research on the company and that you are up-to-date with industry news.” How would you describe an ideal employee? “Here you’ll get an idea as to whether you are a good fit for the company. It also shows that you are eager to please and keen to meet their expectations. “Make sure you only ask a question if you are truly interested in the answer. Use your question time as an opportunity to work out if this is a company you want to work for.” Read: South African salaries in 2018: what top professionals earn