Listed ICT and technology group EOH will host its second annual EOH Connect conference titled Fast Data – Business at the Speed of Thought, at the Sandton Convention Centre in May. “Fast data is a buzz word we hear in many interactions with our various clients and in simple terms; fast data is the ability for businesses to leverage multiple streams of real-time data to make in-the-moment decisions. EOH Connect this year, will unpack this categorically for our attendees,” said Rob Godlonton, CEO of the EOH ICT business. “The disruptive nature of fast data is improving business processes and driving operational and cost efficiencies like never before hence the theme for this years’ conference,” he said. The 2017 event was attended by more than 1,900 ICT professionals and decision makers, while the 2018 edition will take place on Wednesday, 9 May 2018. Speakers at this years’ conference include: Rob Godlonton, CEO EOH ICT;
Vinny Lingham, Co-founder & CEO of Civic.com, and ‘shark’ on Shark Tank South Africa;
Simone Zanetti, VP Cloud EOH International;
Hein Wagner, Global Adventurer. Seven fast data technology tracks At this years’ conference, guests will have the chance to join any of the seven technology topic tracks related to fast data, these are: Agile, Intelligent Infrastructure: Powering compute platforms of the future through the use of more flexible and more responsive infrastructure;
#DevAnything: Every company needs to be a software company capable of continuous delivery. How DevOps, micro services and containerisation can help South African businesses operate with pace and agility;
Big Analytics, real-time: Predicting the future and acting on it. How next generation data platforms will apply predictive analytics, in real-time;
Analytics-driven Customer Experience: How analytics can be embedded and used to drive value into the customer experience;
Blockchain: A practical session exploring how Blockchain can be exploited and how organisations can approach early innovation and investment;
Internet of Things: Digital transformation through IoT, specifically across the value chain of the manufacturing industry;
Robotics: To bot or not? The augmented digital workforce of the future, and what it means for your current workforce. Read: EOH reports big drop in headline earnings citing ‘unfounded media coverage’