Kaspersky Lab Business Incubator has announced a new solution that enables secure online voting based on blockchain called Polys. Online voting appeals to global NGOs, and municipalities looking for citizen involvement in neighborhood and city-wide decision making. However, the risks of making critical choices online are also high, with large-scale online voting opening up vast opportunities for cybercriminals to fix the results, the cyber security company said. The new product was announced during Kaspersky Lab’s Cyber Security Weekend for the Middle East, Turkey and Africa. It offers a customizable online voting platform for non-commercial organisations, businesses and communities, which uses blockchain technology and is secured with transparent crypto algorithms. Offline voting is expensive, time-consuming and often inaccessible – or at least challenging – for people who aren’t physically present to cast a vote. Polys aims to provide anyone with the ability to conduct secure, anonymous and scalable online voting – with results that cannot be altered by participants or organisers. Polys is based on smart contracts in Ethereum (sometimes referred to as Blockchain 2.0) which allows ballot verification and vote tallies to be performed in a decentralized manner. The main benefit is that, due to blockchain’s decentralized nature, the accuracy of voting execution can be verified by the network’s participants. The whole voting data is stored not on servers, but in information blocks on the computers of all network participants: to erase it, a hacker would have to breach all of the computers and gain access to the individual sets of data. Blockchain also allows a voter to easily check if their vote has actually been registered correctly and any tampering of votes will automatically become evident. Blockchain transparency makes it easier to monitor votes and complete voting audits by independent parties. It also doesn’t require extra resources or the need for the physical presence of personnel. In addition, within the Polys voting system, blockchain is encrypted and backed up with mathematical algorithms. These help to ensure anonymity, hide intermediate results and perform calculations on the encrypted data, which is something that can’t be done in other blockchain systems due to its distributed and open nature. Read: Rise in online security threats in Middle East and Africa