HMD Global has announced the availability of the Nokia 8 Sirocco, Nokia 7 plus and the new Nokia 6 in South Africa. These Android One Nokia smartphones were introduced at Mobile World Congress in February, and will go on sale during April 2018 through Cell C, MTN and Vodacom as well as selected retailers. “The new range of Nokia smartphones on Android One comes with no unnecessary UI changes or hidden processes that would consume your battery life or slow it down, this means you can enjoy your phone for longer,” HMD Global said. “All Nokia smartphones in the Android One program, will come with a limited number of pre-installed Google Services apps so that you’ll get more storage space and a streamlined easy to use experience.” Nokia 8 Sirocco The Nokia 8 Sirocco includes enhanced Dual-Sight, ZEISS optics and carefully tuned acoustics with Nokia spatial audio, the Nokia 8 Sirocco is an ultra-compact powerhouse, “and our most beautiful smartphone to date,” HMD Global said. “Its curved glass finish, envelops a precision-crafted stainless-steel frame to deliver a fusion of strength and beauty. Just 2mm thin at the edge, the Nokia 8 Sirocco combines a curved edge-to-edge pOLED 2K 5.5-inch display with smaller bezels and moulded body curves to create an ultra-compact profile. “The steel frame is 2.5 times stronger than 6000 series aluminium, paired with 3D Corning Gorilla Glass 5. Luxuriously weighted and perfectly balanced, it feels more secure in your hand thanks to the improved grip given by the dual diamond-polished stainless steel frame,” HMD Global said. The phone has dual rear sensors with ZEISS optics that combine an ultra-sensitive, wide angle primary camera for low-light performance and a secondary 13MP sensor with 2x optical zoom.  Nokia 7 plus The Nokia 7 plus has enhanced Dual-Sight, dual rear sensors with ZEISS optics combining an ultra-sensitive 12MP wide-angle primary camera that excels in both low-light and extra bright conditions, and a secondary 13MP camera that delivers 2x optical zoom. The Nokia 7 plus is backed by a Qualcomm Snapdragon 660 Mobile Platform, “with an impressive 2-day battery life”. “The vivid 6-inch 18:9 Full HD+ display makes the Nokia 7 plus perfect for browsing, social media consumption, gaming and entertainment with more content in the same width as a traditional 5.5-inch display device,” HMD Global said.  The New Nokia 6 Building on the success of its predecessor, the New Nokia 6 packs even more powerful performance and great new features in a more compact, durable body. Over 60% faster than its predecessor, it now offers enhanced Dual-Sight, ZEISS optics, USB-C fast-charging, a more compact screen-to-body ratio, Nokia spatial audio and pure, secure and up-to-date Android Oreo. “Our engineers have integrated the Qualcomm Snapdragon 630 Mobile Platform to deliver fast and smooth performance alongside great day-long battery life,” HMD Global said.    Read: Huawei launches P20 Lite for R5,999