With one in 10 South Africans now living in an estate or gated community, it should come as no surprise that an increasing number of issues have arisen as to what road rules apply. At the end of November 2017, a landmark decision found that speed trapping in an estate was unlawful unless the estate had been granted permission by the Minister of Transport, the MEC, or a person who is delegated such powers by the Minister or the MEC. “Previously, associations have felt comfortable enacting what may appear to be fairly oppressive rules and regulations, and justifying their existence on the basis that by moving into and residing within such a community run by such an association, that the resident consents thereto,” explained Cliffe Dekker Hofmeyr’s Lucinde Rhoodie. “Now however, at least with respect to the use of public roads and the policing thereof within the community, the MEC’s authorisation will encourage the enactment of rules and regulations which are in line with general public policy as any rules found to be too suffocating would of course not be authorised,” she said. She advised that management associations should, therefore, confirm that they have obtained the requisite consents from the relevant MEC to ensure that the rules are enforceable upon their estate. “For residents, it may be worthwhile raising a query with their respective management association as to whether or not they have received the aforesaid consents. “To the extent that they have not, the rules as they stand, insofar as they relate to the roads in the estate, are unenforceable if challenged legally. There is nothing to prevent residents from complying with the rules willingly, however, this does not affect the legality of the rules,” she said. What about accidents? A recent case decided on by the Ombudsman for Short-Term Insurance (OSTI) also dealt with the issue of driving on public roads and closed estates. In the case, Ms. Z submitted a claim to her insurer following a motor vehicle accident which occurred whilst she was driving in her residential complex. However, the claim was rejected on the basis that she was driving on a non-public road and therefore did not enjoy cover under the policy for the loss. In her complaint she noted that at the sales stage she was not informed that she would not be covered for accidents which occurred on non-public roads. In addition, she said that there were road traffic signs within the complex and that all road regulations applied within the complex – meaning these roads were therefore recognised as public roads. The Ombudsman ruled in favour of Ms. Z and noted that the National Road Traffic Act defines a public road as “any road, street, throughfare or any other place (whether a throughfare or not) which is commonly used by the public or any section thereof or to which the public or any section thereof has the right of access…” “The words ‘or any section thereof’ in this instance would include this section/category/ class of the public that live within the complex,” it said. “Thus the road on which the accident occurred would be considered to be a public road in terms of the National Road Traffic Act notwithstanding that there is no right of general entry and that permission is required in order to enter the complex.” It added that information provided to the policyholder should a reasonable and general explanation of the principles of the relevant contract and information reasonably expected to enable the policyholder to make an informed decision. This should include any special terms and conditions, exclusions, waiting periods, loadings, penalties, excesses, restrictions or circumstances in which benefits will not be provided. Read: Here’s how much more South Africans can expect petrol to go up in 2018