Jasco Carrier Solutions has launched a new proactive in-service fibre network monitoring offering, which it says will break the cost deadlock that has put these types of services out of reach of any but the largest network providers. The service measures the integrity of a fibre plant in real time, allows operators to efficiently isolate faults and take immediate targeted action. This effectively boosts up-time, cuts maintenance costs and effort, Jasco said, while enabling operators and service providers to minimise disruption and meet service level agreements. “As more fibre is rolled out to businesses and homes, traditional reactive network maintenance models are proving less than effective,” said Martin Ferreira of Jasco Carrier Solutions. “There simply isn’t enough time or manpower to physically check on every network alert that comes into the network operations centre.” According to Jasco, the fibre network monitoring device requires no active, onsite equipment at the remote site, and will allow operators to deploy the fibre monitoring product in even the most extreme environmental conditions. “It requires no power and little additional space. It sits on top of the network and can supervise 16- or 64 fibres per device, reaching across 160km (depending on fibre quality) of fibre. It is particularly useful for monitoring and troubleshooting dark fibre and other wholesale services connections,” the group said. With a fibre monitoring solution in place, operators can improve network service testing and quality, and can deliver on service level agreements (SLAs), offering improved and even premium SLAs to service providers and their customers. “In the past, network operators have simply provided connectivity; testing has been the service provider’s problem,” Ferreira said. “With this fibre monitoring device, operators can now provide monitoring, with detailed insight into network uptime and issues.” The device can also identify failures of active devices and problems with the fibre plant, Jasco said. Key features of the fibre monitoring system include the following: Passively monitors fibre links, integrating with GIS to pinpoint problems;
Provides real-time information about fibre loss profiles;
Localises loss points with alarm thresholds;
Provides ultra-fast fibre integrity verification with three to six seconds per port;
Ultra-compact ETSI solution: up to 64 ports per 1RU chassis;
Up to 160km nominal reach for access, metro and core applications;
Measurement signal at 1650nm, outside user traffic wavelengths. Read: Jasco to purchase 51% of Ramm Technologies