As the world has become increasingly globalised and volatile, the need for greater travel freedom and improved safety and security is a necessity. This is according to global citizenship and residence advisory firm, Henley & Partners, which has released a list of the best residency and citizenship-by-investment programmes globally. “Across the economic spectrum, individuals want to transcend the constraints imposed on them by their country of origin and access business, education, career, and lifestyle opportunities on a global scale. “Alternative residence and citizenship represent the most direct routes to global mobility and overall stability, since individuals who have residence or citizenship in multiple jurisdictions benefit from each country’s best practices and are less vulnerable to its risks and shortcomings,” Henley & Partners said. What is residence- and citizenship-by-investment? In its most basic form, citizenship-by-investment is the process whereby qualified, vetted candidates are granted full citizenship in exchange for their substantial economic contribution to the passport-issuing state. Residence-by-investment is a similar process, but candidates in this case are granted temporary residence, which can be extended to permanent residence or, in some cases, citizenship. Henley & Partners noted that neither programme is inherently better than the other, with each offering diverse advantages which meet the needs of particular individuals and families. Residence-by-investment programs, for example, give ultra-high-net-worth individuals the option of physically relocating to a favorable jurisdiction — either now or during retirement — and becoming tax residents of that jurisdiction. Residents of a country have full legal rights, including the right to live, work, study, and receive healthcare in that country. Citizenship-by-investment programs, on the other hand, provide ultra-wealthy families with the privilege of a second or third passport, which affords them all the internal rights enjoyed by residents as well as the broader right of travel, trade, and settlement abroad. Best in the world right now Outlined below are the details of the most credible and successful programs in the residence and citizenship categories. “These programmes uphold the highest standards of due diligence, attracting carefully vetted individuals who bring capital, business networks, and talent to the country in question. “In exchange for their contribution, successful applicants are granted full residence or citizenship, as the case may be,” Henley & Partners said. Top Residence-by-Investment Programmes Top Citizenship-by-Investment Programmes Read:  The rich are betting they can buy their way to a longer life