Applications for the all-inclusive Sasol bursary will close on 30 April 2018 – which means prospective engineering, chemistry and accounting students for 2019 have just 10 days to apply. Sasol is one of the largest companies in South Africa, with nearly 30,000 employees, and often ranks top in the chemical and pharmaceutical category where students want to work. Among the many bursaries offered in the country, Sasol’s programme is one of the most comprehensive, offering to cover all the costs for undergraduate students to study specific degrees. In turn, bursary recipients also have the opportunity to do paid vacation work during the holidays and to be part of the company’s Graduate Development Programme once they complete their studies. What the bursary covers The bursary for undergraduates includes covering 100% of university tuition fees, registration fees and exam fees, as well as an accommodation subsidy, food money and R12,000 for books and pocket money. Postgraduate students receive a monthly allowance of R10,000 for up to 24 months while they complete a Master’s Degree and up to 36 months for while studying towards a PhD. To qualify for the bursary, applicants need to be a South African citizen, and need strong results (over 70%) for maths, science (and accounting for the BCom). The also need 60% for english to be considered. The bursary application is for those looking to study in 2019, and is subject to a candidate’s year end results (if currently in matric). For students already studying at university, the bursary is subject to end-year results, which need to closely match the results submitted during the application process. The subjects that qualify for the bursary include: BEng or BSc Engineering Chemical
Mechanical
Civil
Industrial
Electronic
Mining BSc Chemistry (Masters compulsory)
Geology (Honours compulsory)
Metallurgy (Honours compulsory) BCom Accounting, CA Stream (CTA, PGDA) Postgraduate studies Masters and PhD bursaries in Chemistry and Chemical Engineering According to Sasol, applications need to be submitted online, and candidates will be added to a short-list that will get a follow-up interview (by the end of May 2018). The outcome of the process will be settled by the end of August 2018. You can read the full details and apply at Sasol’s bursary website. Read: University fees 2018: how much it costs to study in South Africa