The BMW 3 Series was the most searched-for car in South Africa in 2017 according to data from automotive site, AutoTrader. It was followed by the Mercedes-Benz C-Class and the Volkswagen Golf. Each year, the vehicle marketplace analyses search statistics pertaining to its site. The findings are a clear indication of consumer interest and buying preferences, said AutoTrader. They are especially important given the fact that Mercedes-Benz and BMW do not report individual sales figures. “In 2016, the most searched-for vehicles were identical: the 3 Series, C-Class and Golf occupied the top three spots. We are not surprised by this finding. BMW’s 3 Series is massively popular; it has sold more than 15 million units worldwide since its launch in 1975,” said George Mienie, AutoTrader CEO. “South African motorists love this car because of its sensational driving experience. The C-Class is a similar success story; it’s been in existence since 1993 and its best-in-class levels of refinement, luxury and safety have seen it prove exceptionally popular with South African motorists,” Mienie said. In fourth place in 2016 was the Toyota Hilux – and this is a position it occupied once again in 2017. “It was no surprise to see the Hilux in this position yet again. It is, after all, the top-selling new vehicle in South Africa (during 2017, Toyota sold a whopping 36 422 of these bakkies),” Mienie noted. He pointed out that all six companies represented in the top 10 –BMW, Mercedes-Benz, Volkswagen, Toyota, Ford and Audi – have a long and proud history in South Africa. “Clearly, motorists trust these brands and it will be some time before relative newcomers to the fray (Hyundai and Kia, for instance) will inspire the same level of confidence. We will be monitoring – and reporting on – these trends with great interest,” he said. These are AutoTrader’s top searched-for vehicles for 2017: BMW 3 Series  Mercedes-Benz C-Class  Volkswagen Golf  Toyota Hilux  Ford Ranger  Volkswagen Polo  BMW 1 Series  Audi A3  Toyota Fortuner  BMW X5  Read: These are the best cars in South Africa – ranked by affordability