Expat and international mobility group Xpatweb has published the results of its critical skills survey, which lists the types of skills and sectors which companies have identified as being the most lacking in South Africa. According to Xpatweb’s survey most companies (75%) admit that they actively seek international talent to fill their skills needs, even despite viewing the visa processes needed as prohibitive. South Africa has for a number of years been suffering from a major skills shortage, particularly in technical fields such as ICT and engineering. Among the survey results Xpatweb identified occupations in critical areas where companies struggle to find the necessary skills, locally. These ‘most needed’ skills were identified in these areas: Engineers
ICT specialists
Financial specialists and accountants
Specialised technical skills
Sales managers and
Senior management Other occupations where skills were needed, include: Medical specialists
Artisans
Media and production
Mining
General managers
Marketing managers
Machine operators
Actuaries
Researchers
Project managers and
Business professionals High demand, high price With such a high demand, it comes as no surprise that there are many job openings for people with the requisite skills offering large salaries. The latest data from jobs portal CareerJunction lists IT professionals as being in the most demand so far in 2018 – a trend which has persisted for a number of years. This is followed by financial skills and business management skills. Research conducted by another careers portal, Adzuna, found that IT, finance, and engineering related skills – particularly those around programming languages and software development – are the rarest skills in the country, and draw premium salaries. While these fields are always in high demand, there is little in the way of ‘supply’ – ie skilled and qualified job seekers. Critical skills needed in South Africa Like many countries, South Africa opens up its visa processes to people who meet the requirements to fill roles or jobs that fall under its critical skills list. The list reflects the data that has been published by jobs portals and Xpatweb, with the South African government willing to open up its borders – or at least make the immigration process easier – for technically-skilled foreigners who can meet job requirements that cannot be locally sources. The list covers 12 broad educational fields: Agriculture, Agricultural Operations and Related Sciences
Architecture and the Built Environment
Business, Economics and Management Studies
Information Communication & Technology
Engineering
Health Professions and Related Clinical Sciences
Life and Earth Sciences
Professionals and Associate Professionals
Trades
Business Process Outsourcing (BPO)
Academics and Researchers
Post-Graduates Along with the broader fields above, there are also over 220 specific careers or qualifications that fall into one or more of those fields. The greatest demand is found in the ICT, Engineering and Life Sciences sectors, with specific jobs among general professionals and managers as well as academics and researchers also getting wide coverage. The full list was published by the South African department of home affairs in 2014, and has remained relevant since. Read: 3 in-demand jobs and skills in South Africa right now