According to a December 2017 report by Wesbank, demand and stocks for used vehicles is slowly drying up across South Africa, leaving motorists to search for new models at a bargain. WesBank’s data showed that the current replacement cycle for new cars is at 44 months. The ageing carpark means consumers are ready to replace their vehicles before service and warranty plans lapse. These consumers also want new cars that bring a promise of reliability as well as fuel-efficient technologies. For these buyers, the current marketing incentives from original equipment manufacturers (OEMs) offer excellent value at a time when they are ready to replace their cars. As more South Africans look towards newer vehicles, BusinessTech looks at 11 anticipated brands coming to South Africa in 2018. Alfa Romeo Stelvio Quadrifoglio The Stelvio was officially Alfa’s first SUV, and the Quadrifoglio promises to expand on the well received car by offering a significantly faster, limited-edition model. It is expected to arrive in South Africa in late 2018.  BMW X2 Expected to launch in South Africa within the first half of the year, the BMW X2 closely follows the popular X1 model but promises to be a quicker, sportier version. BMW South Africa is yet to provide official pricing. Ford Ecosport The 2018 Ecosport sports a noticeably different design to current Ecosport models with a new grille and lighting design. While Europe will be receiving the new 92 kW/300 Nm 1.5-litre EcoBlue turbodiesel model with all-wheel drive, due to our poor local fuel quality, this engine is not coming to South Africa reports Cars.co.za.  Ford Ranger The Ford Ranger its one of South Africa’s best-selling vehicles, having topped the monthly vehicle sales charts on various occasions in 2017. New changes for 2018 include an Fx4 option on wider range, while front park assist is now fitted as standard on all Ranger XLT and Fx4 models.  Jaguar E-Pace Following the successful launch of its F-Pace SUV in South Africa a year ago, Jaguar will unveil its E-Pace in the country in early 2018. While pricing will be announced closer to launch, the mid-sized premium SUV has been priced in the UK from about £28,500 – just shy of R500,000.  Mercedes-Benz X-Class The X-Class is a premium pickup which promises to combine ‘leisure and labour’ boasts a payload of up to 1.1 tonnes, and a towing capacity of up to 3.5 tonnes. The pickup will come in four models starting with a four cylinder engine going up to six cylinders. Having already launched in Europe in November at a starting price of 37,000 euros (R550,000), it is set to arrive in South Africa before the end of 2018.  Renault Duster Renault’s updated Duster features an updated physical design (including a new grille, and lighting design) as well as increased cabin space, a new dashboard design and possibly an engine upgrade. No price has been given for the new Duster, although Renault South Africa has confirmed that the car will be available in South Africa in the latter half of 2018.  Renault Alaskan Renault will take on the South African bakkie-market directly with its new Alaskan offering. It is mechanically similar to the Nissan Navara, with a single, diesel, 2.3-litre four cylinder engine powering the main offering. According to Renault South Africa the Alaskan is set for introduction in South Africa in the second half of 2018 though local prices and specifications will only be finalised closer to the launch date.  Volkswagen Arteon Volkwagen’s latest sedan offering, the Arteon, is expected to launch in South Africa in April 2018 for around R600,000.  Volkswagen Polo The 6th-generation Polo, which will be launched in South Africa at the end of January 2018. It promises to be a significant departure from previous Polo models being designed from the ground up, including new engine sizes, interior options and the adoption of Volkswagen’s new MQB platform architecture. It is expected to cost around R280,000 according to local motoring site, Cars.co.za.  Volkswagen T-Roc Volkswagen’s crossover will focus heavily on customization and advanced driving technology, including high-tech systems such as Front Assist area monitoring with City Emergency Braking and Pedestrian Monitoring, Automatic Post-Collision Braking System and the lane keeping system Lane Assist. No prices or official release dates have been announced yet, other than that the car is expected to launch late 2018/early 2019.  Read: 5 of the most luxurious SUV’s available in South Africa