If you’re exceptionally talented in the field of science, humanities, engineering, medicine, digital technology or the arts, you could be eligible for a special UK visa – the Tier 1 (Exceptional Talent) visa. This is according John Dunn, immigration expert at Sable International, who notes that the visa allows you to live, work and eventually settle in the UK with very few restrictions. Dunn said it is now also much easier to get one of these visas after the UK Home Secretary, Amber Rudd, announced on 15 November that the quota for the Tier 1 (Exceptional Talent) visas has doubled as a part of the UK welcoming talented individuals who will enhance the UK’s economy. Tier 1 Visa According to Dunn, if you are granted a Tier 1 (Exceptional Talent) visa, there’s little you can’t do in the UK. You are able to: 
Work for an employer, as a director of a company, or be self-employed
Bring your family members with you
Travel freely in and out of the UK
Do voluntary work
Change jobs without telling the Home Office
 The only real restriction on this visa is that you may not work as a doctor or dentist in training, or a professional sportsperson or sports coach. The Tier 1 (Exceptional Talent) visa allows you to stay in the UK for five years, after which, if you qualify, you can apply for indefinite leave to remain (ILR). Alternatively, once your five years are up, you can also choose to extend your Tier 1 visa. “With an increase in the number of Tier 1 (Exceptional Talent) visas, your chances of getting one, should you qualify, have literally doubled,” he said. “If your endorsement application is successful, you will receive a letter of endorsement, which you will need for your visa application. Only once you’ve received this letter may you apply for your visa. Your application must be lodged within three months of receiving your letter of endorsement.” “The percentage of visas granted for those who receive an endorsement is in the high 90s, but be aware, receiving your endorsement does not mean you will automatically get your Tier 1 visa. “Your endorsement and your visa application are two distinct processes and you will still have to fulfil several other visa-related criteria in order to be granted your exceptional talent visa,” he said. Jobs This Tier 1 visa is for individuals who show exceptional talent or exceptional promise in a variety of fields. In order to be considered exceptional by the Home Office, you will need to be officially recognised as a current or emerging leader in your field. You will first need to be endorsed in one of the following fields, by the relevant competent body. The following organisations are charged with assessing your skill. Sable International also provided an example list of jobs which were currently being targeted across the various fields. Science 
Active researchers in a relevant scientific field and have a PhD or equivalent research experience
 Engineering 
Mechanical engineering
Process engineering
Civil engineering
Biomedical engineering
Innovation and policy engineering
Electrical engineering
Information communication technology engineering
 Humanities and social science  
Philosophy
Anthropology and geography
Economics
Sociology
Psychology
Political studies
Law
 Medicine 
Anatomy
Clinical medicine
Biochemistry
Anyone who demonstrates exceptional promise in their respective field, or those who have already exhibited exceptional talent through research or innovation in the medical field
 Digital technology  
Programmers
Developers
Anyone involved in the business of digital technology
 The arts  
Dance
Music
Theatre
Visual arts (including museums and galleries)
Literature
Combined arts
Any person whose work has been published, performed, presented, distributed or exhibited internationally and you are able to provide evidence thereof
 You can read more about the requirements involved here. Read: Landmark case makes it easier for some SA families to emigrate to the UK