A new salary report published by professional recruitment specialists Robert Walters shows how much salaries are expected to increase for skilled professionals in the finance and legal industries. According to the group’s survey, general salaries in South Africa are expected to increase by 5% on average in 2018 – a modest rise in line with inflation. However, professionals with highly sought-after skillsets can expect to see rises of between 12% and 15%, with finance professionals enjoying the strongest average salary growth at 7%, with legal professionals seeing an average of 5% increases. Following a growing sense of confidence in South Africa toward the end of 2017, country manager for Robert Walters South Africa, Nic Sephton-Poultney said that the country will see a ‘buoyant’ 2018. “Conditions will continue improving, with confidence increasing among professionals and employers,” Sephton-Poultney said. “However salary growth is expected to be more modest in 2018. Professionals who can offer a combination of strong technical skills, industry experience and who meet employment equity requirements will be highly sought after and remunerated accordingly.” “Finance and legal professionals will enjoy demand of their skills, with SME’s and market leaders expected to continue recruiting extensively in these areas.” “With competition for top talent extremely high, securing top talent will require employers to operate swift hiring processes, as well as offering a strong employment proposition including a competitive salary and bonus, a clear path to career progression and a flexible working model.” Notably, as with previous years, skilled professionals within the banking, finance and legal sector will be in high demand, with jobs in these areas expected to show the largest salary growth. These sectors are beset with skills shortages, which is often compounded by the available skilled professionals actively seeking to relocate internationally, Robert Walters said, looking for a more stable environment without the uncertainty that persists in the South African economy. “Employers may need to consider upskilling existing staff where external candidates are unavailable, as well as offering more competitive annual salary increases to retain highly skilled candidates,” the group said. Salary increases The tables below show how salaries in the banking, finance and legal sectors are expected to shift in 2018, based on the salary survey conducted by Robert Walters. Qualified CA (SA) or CIMA Part-qualified CA (SA) or CIMA Taxation/Treasury Investment banking and financial services Accounting/Audit/Tax/Treasury Compliance Legal – in-house for commerce and industry Legal – in-house for financial services Legal – private practice Read: This one graph shows how the average salary has changed in South Africa over the past 70 years