The rapid pace of technological development has dramatically changed the business landscape – creating the urgent need for constant skills development, training, and education. Enabled by various LMS (Learner Management System) software, an increasing number of organisations and educational institutions are taking their learning programs online. LMS solutions that break the barriers of distance to deliver immersive, interactive learning experiences, will be game-changers going into 2018. This month, value-added software distributor, Dax Data announced the addition of Adobe’s innovative LMS – Captivate Prime, to their portfolio. Adobe Captivate Prime is a next-generation LMS that facilitates responsive E-Learning initiatives by empowering trainers, educators and instructional designers to deliver nearly any kind of E-Learning content to both desktop and mobile devices. “We are proud to be the first to bring this innovative solution to African markets. Captivate Prime is not your typical LMS, it is ideal for aligning offline and online enterprise-wide learning initiatives, enabling organisations to create measurable and tangible learning experiences”, says Jeremy Matthews, CEO of Dax Data. Intended for digital training in a corporate environment, Adobe first introduced Captivate Prime in 2015. The cloud-based service streamlines content development and distribution through an intuitive and flexible interface that seamlessly integrates with Adobe Connect and Adobe Captivate. With the addition of Captivate Prime, Adobe could complete “The E-Learning Trifecta”. This means that using Adobe’s technology educators can create eLearning content with Captivate, manage and administrate the learning process with Captivate Prime, and deliver interactive learning experiences with Connect. “Combining this solution with our current offering means we are able to add value for our clients by delivering a holistic E-Learning suite”, says Matthews. Adobe Captivate Prime enables coordinators to take the student experience to the next level and break the barriers of distance through immersive and interactive learning experiences are the future of eLearning and training. By incorporating Adobe solutions into corporate training and skills development initiatives, organisations can equip employees with the tools necessary to drive corporate growth and development. For more information on Adobe, Captivate Prime watch the following video.  This article was published in partnership with Dax Data.