Jobs portal CareerJunction has published it latest salary review for 2018, showing what the average employee earns per month in 94 jobs across 10 fields. Because the survey broadly covers the same fields and job positions each year – with over 130,000 job listings assessed – BusinessTech is able to compare how salary offers in each position have changed over the review period. For a more detailed look at the salary ranges for the jobs based on level seniority, you can read South African salaries in 2018: what people earn. The tables below look at how salaries for the various job offerings have changed between November 2017 and November 2018, using the the highest-level intermediate pay for each position. Numbers have been rounded. The changes represent the change in salaries offered by companies as per the thousands of posts on CareeerJunction’s portal each month. Across all sectors, employers are generally offering significantly higher salaries in 2018, though there are a few exceptions, possible showing a decline in demand for those roles. Of the 93 job roles listed below, 61 showed a higher offer in 2018, compared to the 32 that showed a lower offer than a year ago. However, only 46 showed an increase above CPI (5.3% in 2017), with 15 jobs groups showing increases under that level. By far the best sector to go job hunting in would be marketing, where all job offers showed a higher average salary, most of which were above CPI. Architecture and engineering skills also proved to be in high demand. While the ICT sector showed a balance of higher salaries in 2018, most of the salaries offered were below CPI adjustments.  The tables below outline the salary adjustments for like-for-like job roles between 2017 and 2018, using the upper salary boundary for those with intermediate experience. Higher salary offers are highlighted in green, with lower salary offerings in red. Offers with increases below inflation are highlighted in orange. Numbers have been rounded. Admin, Office and Support Architecture and Engineering Building and Construction Finance Information and Communication Technology Manufacturing and Assembly Marketing Medical and Health Sales Warehousing and Logistics Read: South Africa’s biggest salary survey – this is what people earn