MTN Group has made several new executive appointments, including the position of Chief Technology & Information Officer and Executive for Corporate Services & Sustainability. Charles Molapisi has been appointed as the company’s Group Chief Technology and Information Officer, effective 1 January 2019. His appointment follows Babak Fouladi’s resignation from the company to take up another opportunity in Europe. Molapisi previously worked for Telkom and Liberty Life prior to joining MTN, and held various senior management positions in MTN Nigeria, including that of Chief Information Officer (CIO). His current role is that of CEO of MTN Zambia where his championing of a pro-customer positioning resulted in the company leading all competitors in customer experience metrics. Former MTN Cyprus CEO, Philip van Dalsen, has been appointed MTN Zambia CEO, and will also take up his new role on 1 January 2019. Nikos Angelopoulos recently joined MTN as Group CIO, accountable for Information Technology Design and Delivery. In his role, he is responsible for managing and maintaining the standard IT architecture across the Group, and, in line with the strategy, ensure that the company leads innovation and customer experience. David Gilarranz has been appointed as the CEO for MTN Digital. He joined MTN from Millicom where he was the VP: Digital and Innovation. @The recent Simfy acquisition will report directly to David as part of his portfolio,” MTN said. Motselisi Molapo, the new executive for Group Internal Audi and Forensics will join MTN on 14 January 2019 from Liberty Holdings, where she was the Chief Audit Executive reporting to the Audit Committee. Prior to this, she held senior roles at AngloGold Ashanti and PwC. Nompilo Morafo has been appointed as Executive for Group Corporate Services and Sustainability, effective 1 February 2019. Nompilo joins MTN from LafargeHolcim, where she was the Country Director for Communications and Public Affairs. Read: MTN shares slide as it remains in talks with Nigeria over $10 billion dispute