Moyo is proud to announce that they have been accepted into the Microsoft AI Inner Circle Partner Program. The program recognises a partner’s expertise and ability to deliver value driven AI solutions that have been deployed and have high business impact. Moyo was accepted into the AI Inner Circle after the successful delivery of multiple AI projects using Microsoft technologies. Yuri Baijnath, Moyo’s Technology Services General Manager stated “Being recognised in this way is a huge milestone for Moyo. As a gold level Microsoft Partner with competencies in Data & Analytics, Data Platform and Cloud Platform, and now the addition of the AI Inner Circle, we are well positioned to play an active role in business transformation for our customers using AI”. Acceptance into the AI Inner Circle program grants Moyo early access to Microsoft’s latest AI developments, invitation-only technical training, insights into their AI best practices, as well as the support of an international team of Microsoft experts. This will allow Moyo to drive innovative AI Solutions for our customers. With over 10 years of experience, and a team of 160 specialised consultants, Moyo has been helping our clients do more with their data, through advanced data analytics, machine learning, business intelligence solutions and smart agents. Moyo delivers these solutions via our pool of vastly talented data scientists with specialisations in mathematics, statistics, industrial and chemical engineering, image recognition and many more. Moyo prides itself on being an organisation which delivers end-to-end data and analytics solutions across multiple industry verticals and is excited to deliver many more AI infused solutions via its various technology practices in Software Development, Data Engineering, Data Integration, Descriptive Analytics and Advanced Analytics. These practices along with the various Business Services Offerings (Enterprise Architecture, Solutions Architecture, Data Architecture, Project and Change Management, Business Analysis) are a huge driving factor in Moyo’s successful delivery of AI based solutions. This article was published in partnership with Moyo.