Jobs portal CareerJunction has released its latest index for November 2018, showing which job skills are most sought-after by employers in South Africa right now. The CareerJunction Index settled at 98 index points for November, indicating no noteworthy changes in labour market conditions. Job volumes were down by 2% in November with a further decrease expected for December, as the year draws to a close. “Year-on-year, skills demand has decreased significantly in the medical & health, sales, admin, office & support and marketing sectors (25%-50%),” CareerJunction said. “However, a strong demand persists for professionals in finance, business & management, IT and architecture and engineering. The group identified three positions that are in high demand, which employers are looking to fill: Executive Management / Director Average salary offerings for intermediate level positions: GP: R 70,050 to R 85,609
WC: Not enough information available
KZN: Not enough information available Purchasing & Procurement Average salary offerings for intermediate level positions: GP: R 28,148 to R 36,572
WC: R 23,889 to R 32,685
KZN: Not enough information available Building Project Management Average salary offerings for intermediate level positions: GP: R 39,286 to R 48,036
WC: R 27,526 to R 34,764
KZN: Not enough information available Needed skills As has been the case for much of 2018, South African employers are looking for software developers and middle/department managers. Software Developers are highly sought-after in the IT sector, particularly those with skills in Java and C#, CareerJunction said. It found that since January 2018, there has been an uptake in IT jobs of 6%. It added that demand for middle/department managers is growing steadily – with an 18% uptake in jobs since January. CareerJunction said that financial/project accountants also remain high in demand, with job volumes for professionals in this field having steadily increased over the past three months. Demand by sector An overview of vacancy levels across various sectors (indicated by the below demand graph) provides a good indication of where the majority of employment takes place. The IT, business & management and finance sectors are undoubtedly the most sought-after sectors, followed by the sales, admin, office & support and architecture & engineering sectors, among others listed. “When looking at active job seekers across various sectors (indicated by the supply graph), areas of high supply correlate closely to areas of high demand – however, supply outstrips demand in some areas, leading to a competitive environment for job seekers,” CarrerJunction said.  Read: 6 new jobs types that SA companies are trying to fill