President Cyril Ramaphosa has gazetted the official salaries for South Africa’s ministers and parliamentarians Earlier this week, Ramaphosa declared that there will be no annual salary increases for the deputy president as well as cabinet ministers at a time when the economy is experiencing hardships. While the Independent Commission on the Remuneration of Public Office Bearers has recommended an increase of 4% across all categories of public office bearers, president Ramaphosa has determined otherwise. “President Ramaphosa’s decision not to follow the Commission’s recommendations is informed by the imperative that the state be considerate, responsive and demonstrate restraint, especially during periods of economic hardship, when determining the level of salary increases for public representatives,” said the Presidency. Salaries and allowances of the Constitutional Court judges and judges of other courts will be increased by 2.5%. In provincial executives, Premiers, Members of Executive Councils and Speakers will not receive a salary increase. With regard to Members of Parliament, a 2.5% increase will apply to categories ranging from House Chairperson, Chief Whip: Majority Party, Leader of the Opposition and Whips, to Members of the National Assembly and permanent delegates to the National Council of Provinces. Members of provincial legislatures will receive a 2.5% salary increase, and Magistrates will benefit from a 4% salary adjustment, as will office bearers in of both national and provincial houses of traditional leaders. Kings and Queens will be eligible for a 2.5% increase. As leader of the opposition in parliament, DA leader Mmusi Maimane will get a salary of R1.6 million – the same level as ANC chief whip, Jackson Mthembu. As leader of a minority party, EFF leader Julius Malema will get paid R1.3 million – the same as chief whip of the opposition, John Steenhuisen. Other whips will get paid R1.2 million, just ahead of standard members of parliament, who will get paid R1.1 million. These are the salaries will apply for the 2018/19 year. Deputy President, Ministers and Deputy Ministers Members of the National Assembly and Permanent Delegates to the National Council of Provinces Premiers, Members of the Executive Council and Members of the Provincial Legislatures Government Salary changes by BusinessTech on Scribd  Read: Zuma must pay his own legal fees – and pay back taxpayer money already spent