Epson’s next generation of EcoTank ITS printers offer an updated, more compact design and improved user-operating experience. New to the EcoTank ITS stable, the Epson L4150, L4160, L6160, L6170, and L6190 models feature large ink tanks that are more accessible and easy to refill. Now positioned at the front of the printer, ink tanks provide a clear view of the ink levels, and the enhanced ink filling system is engineered to minimise the risk of spills and mess. The new ink bottles incorporate a mechanism that ensures only the right tanks are filled with the corresponding colour. The latest range of Epson EcoTank ITS printers offer an excellent solution for home and small office use, delivering an ultra-low cost per page and includes three years’ worth of ink. From just one ink tank, over 14,000 pages can be printed in black and 11,200 in colour. “Epson’s original ink tank system broke the printing mould in terms of offering a substantial quantity of ink and removing the need for cartridges, thanks to an integrated ultra-high-capacity ink tank fitted to the side,” says Timothy Thomas, Epson South Africa’s consumer sales manager. “The latest models continue to offer the same benefits that customers have come to love about the EcoTank ITS range, with priority focus given to cost efficiency and usability.” The new models offer Wi-Fi, Wi-Fi Direct and a full suite of mobile options for printing photos and documents remotely. Additionally, Ethernet and Scan-to-Cloud2 are available on the L6160, L6170, L6190 models. The Premium EcoTank ITS printers (L6160, L6170, L6190) feature PrecisonCore printheads and Epson’s genuine pigment inks to produce sharp, clear text. These models also offer double-sided printing and fast print speeds of up to 15ppm, while specific models offer higher capacity paper trays, an automatic document feeder and fax. The Epson L4150, L6160, L6170 and L6190 printers were named iF Design Award 2018 winners by Hanover-based iF International Forum Design GmbH. Recognised around the world as one of the most prestigious awards for innovative industrial product design excellence, products are evaluated based on a wide range of criteria including practicability, workmanship, consideration of environmental standards, degree of elaboration and innovation, functionality, usability, safety, aesthetics, and universal design. Manabu Kawahara, general manager for design in Epson’s Printing Solutions Operations Division, says, “We are delighted to receive this prestigious award. Epson’s aim is to create products that help improve the quality of people’s lifestyles and work, and this goal is at the forefront of our minds as we seek to design products that exceed customer expectations.” The new generation of Eco Tank ITS printers are available from leading retailers nationwide and online, with a three-year extended warrantee (terms and conditions apply). Epson is a global leader in printing, scanning and projection innovation – for more information, visit www.epson.co.za. This article was published in partnership with Epson.