President Jacob Zuma has reportedly tabled a number of conditions which will need to be fulfilled before he steps down as South Africa’s president. ANC president Cyril Ramaphosa called for patience following a meeting with Zuma earlier in the week. “The discussions were constructive and lay the basis for a speedy resolution of the matter in the interests of the country and its people,” said Ramaphosa. Speaker of the National Assembly Baleka Mbete told UK media that the issue of Zuma’s resignation would be over with “quite soon”, with an announcement expected as early as the new week. Citing people close to the process, City Press has outlined Zuma’s conditions for stepping down: ‘state-guaranteed safety for him and his family, his security being maintained at its current level and for the state to pay his legal fees for current and future matters linked to his tenure in government’. The Sunday Times  reported that Zuma could avoid prosecution on charges of state capture if he admits criminal wrongdoing, and enters into a deal with the state against the Gupta family. It said that the prospect of a plea bargain is part of an exit package being secretly negotiated between Ramaphosa and Zuma. However the deal has been delayed due to the costs and complexities involved, and the fact that South African law does not accommodate for political deals for criminal prosecutions, the report said. The deal would require Zuma to disclose any and all criminal acts, and would also require him to name others who were involved or complicit in the acts. There are some benefits that Zuma can expect that are given to all former state presidents in South Africa. These include: Personal security for himself, wife and his immediate family. This will include physical security such as bodyguards as well as a motorcade based on an assessment of his security requirements. However the security details will be notably smaller than what he is currently afforded.
A home which the State contributes to fully or partially – based on Zuma’s security requirements.
Health insurance, including treatment at military hospitals, as well as the care and respect one would typically give to a former head of state.
A mandated salary (approved at R2.87 million in 2016) with any increases as stipulated in government gazettes.
An indirect line to government if the state decides to utilise his services for diplomatic functions such as peace, ceremonies, or as a representative of the state. The extent of these additional roles will be at the discretion of the incumbent president. Read: Zuma to avoid prison if he tells all on Guptas: report