The DA has called for a major shift in thinking around South Africa’s budget, calling for a “policy shock” that will boost economic growth and create jobs in the country. “No government can tax itself to prosperity,” the party said. “In our view, this means there needs to be total change to policy direction and spending patterns in order to grow our economy at a rapid rate that will create jobs and bring in new tax revenue, and introduce big, deep, and lasting spending cuts to all the waste and excess in government.” The party put forward a list of changes it says could free up over R110 billion in South Africa’s budget over the short, medium and long term – but would require taking extreme measures like cutting government departments, freezing salaries, and abandoning ‘dead weight’ projects. “We need to cut spending and expenditure in the right areas. The cuts ought to focus on superfluous government departments, zombie SOEs, and vanity projects such as the New Development Bank. If the budget does this, we will support it,” the party said. “However, if the budget cuts basic services such as health, education, social grants and infrastructure that facilities growth – we will reject it.” Downsizing government The DA said that the first way to cut spending would be to announce a package of structural reforms. This would include: Reducing the size of the cabinet by at least five ministries, which could save an estimated R122 million in 2018/19;
The implementation of a 6% per year “haircut” on all mandatory cost containment items in national government, which would save an estimated R2.3 billion in 2018/19; and
The implementation of a 6% per year “haircut” on all mandatory cost containment items in provincial government, which would save an estimated R3 billion in 2018/19; Salary freezes The DA said that government should also confront the ballooning cost of “compensation of employees”, which is projected to be R587 billion in 2018/19, by implementing a “wage freeze”, for the period of one year, across the public service. This included salary freezes for: Public service office bearers, which would save an estimated R547 million in 2018/19;
Performance bonuses in general government, which would save an estimated R2.2 billion in 2018/19;
Salaries of all employees in local government, which could save an estimated R4.4 billion in 2018/19; and
Salaries of all employees in general government, which could save an estimated R54.9 billion in 2018/19. Cutting spending In addition to austerity measures, the DA said that the minister should implement a comprehensive spending review, aimed at identifying sustainable savings, over the medium term, between 2018/19 and 2020/21, including: Reducing the size of the executive, to about 15 ministries, which could save R13.8 billion over the medium term;
Reducing the number of foreign missions by 69, which could save an estimated R3.9 billion over the medium term;
Running the provincial legislatures more efficiently, which could save an estimated R R5.8 billion over the medium term; and
Withdrawing from the New Development Bank, which would save an estimated R17.2 billion over the medium term. Selling off state assets A comprehensive spending review would also be geared towards selling off state assets, including: Selling assets by privatising, or part-privatising, some of the 223 “public entities”. After It should be noted that many of these entities run at massive losses;
Selling, or leasing, “underutilised land parcels”, not well located for housing development, valued at about R12.6 billion, and which cost about R42 million in rates, taxes and maintenance in 2016/17; and
Selling government’s remaining shares in Telkom, which would raise an estimated R7 billion in 2018/19. The savings identified as a result of a comprehensive spending review should be allocated to fund investment in infrastructure and skills development to support economic growth; and to cut the fiscal deficit in order to reduce national debt and debt service costs over the medium term between 2018/19 and 2020/21, the DA said. You can read the full DA statement here. Read: How South Africa’s wealth taxes have changed over the past 20 years