At the start of any new year, the word “resolutions” come up a lot. While many of these resolutions are personal ones, the start of a new year also presents the perfect opportunity for businesses to relook the way they empower their mobile workforce productivity. Meet Tom. Tom is part of a large enterprise and often works remotely, much like the majority of his colleagues. While Tom loves the freedom his mobile lifestyle affords him, his role is not without its challenges. He needs a number of cloud tools to ensure he is productive at all times; he needs reliable connectivity, a contract from a service provider that suits his unique usage needs and uninterrupted access to corporate resources and information. Meet Mary. Mary is Tom’s boss. She is in charge of the entire mobile workforce. While Mary knows a team that telecommutes is key to the nature of the business – it can be difficult to monitor and support employees remotely. From managing inventory and guaranteeing connectivity to tracking usage, Mary has to handle a great deal of admin to be certain that employees are as productive working outside the office as they would be working inside the office. By using telecoms expense management (TEM) software, enterprises can solve many of these common challenges. TEM cloud software enables the management of mobile usage, spend and performance, which in turn enables many business benefits: 1. Increased cost visibility: With the right TEM platform, businesses can monitor their entire mobile ecosystem. This will help to increase efficiency, reduce wastage, curb overspending, identify any billing irregularities and allocate costs to the right employees and departments. 2. Greater freedom: Employees are often worried that they may be overspending on corporate-issued devices and incurring out of bundle costs. With a TEM mobile app, they can easily monitor usage and receive usage alerts and warnings. 3. Tailored packages: Mobile workforces are all different and need packages suited to their unique needs. A TEM partner will help you negotiate with different service providers to ensure the ideal packages for optimal productivity, at the most cost effective rates for the business. If employee needs change, TEM software makes it easy to compare alternative package pricing and benefits. As mobile workforce needs change, companies need to find smarter ways to adapt and manage the workforce evolution using automated processes enable by Software such as OneView TEM. For more information, visit the Nebula website. This article was published in partnership with Nebula.