The department of education has requested public comment on a number of proposed changes it plans to make when considering whether a child should be promoted to the next grade. Among the changes are a number of simple clarifications as to the wording of the current legislation – including the fact that the listed conditions needed to pass each grade were not merely ‘guidelines’, but rather formal requirements needed to be promoted to the next grade. However, there are also a number of amendments which propose to fundamentally alter the promotion requirements between grades 7-9. Changes Previously learners in Grades 7-9 could be promoted from grade to grade if they have offered nine subjects and have complied with the promotion requirements in eight of the subjects – provided the School-Based Assessment component of the ninth subject has been completed. This has been amended so that students now need to only meet the promotion requirements of seven of the nine subjects (effectively one less), provided the School-Based Assessment component of the ninth subject has been completed. The amendments also change the requirements needed for individual subjects, and drop the minimum requirements for mathematics. Current requirements under paragraph 21 50% or more in one language at Home Language level;
40% or more in the second required official language at First Additional Language level;
40% or more in Mathematics;
40% or more in any three of the other required subjects – including Natural Sciences, Life Orientation, Social Sciences, Arts and Culture, and Economic Management Sciences. Proposed requirements under paragraph 21 40% in four subjects, one of which is a Home Language;
Any three subjects at 30%;
A condonation of 2% in one subject if it will lead to a pass; In an interview with the Star on Monday, Elijah Mhlanga, the department’s spokesperson said that the latest move was meant to align promotion requirements in the entire secondary school level. We want everything to be the same. We want people to know that pass requirements of secondary school are like this,” Mhlanga said. “We’re at different pages of achieving exactly that. But right now we want to align Grades 7, 8 and 9 with what is in Grades 10, 11 and 12.” We’re not instructing people to get the minimum,” he said. “We want them to still continue to aim for total marks on offer. But then if they can’t, we’re saying that should be the minimum. “We’re not saying learners should now feel free to get the lowest possible. We’re saying this should be the minimum, but those who have goals in their lives will still work hard at achieving 100%.” Read: How much it will cost to send your kids to school and university over the next 18 years in South Africa