Newly elected president Cyril Ramaphosa is expected announce a cabinet reshuffle in the next week, according to a report by the Mail & Guardian, with some dramatic changes beyond simply shuffling out his predecessor’s troublemakers. The ANC has confirmed that the party’s National Executive Committee will meet this coming weekend, fueling speculation that Ramaphosa will be consulting with the party over his cabinet. The Mail & Guardian, citing party insiders, reported that the new president’s plan is to reshuffle his cabinet by next Friday (2 March), with many allies of former president Jacob Zuma squarely in the cross-hairs. Aside from position changes, the paper reported that Ramaphosa also wants to downsize ministries, taking it from 35 departments to 25. While some departments will be merged, others will be removed entirely, it said. One of the biggest changes could be the shutting down of the public enterprises department, with the sources saying Ramaphosa wants state companies to report to the relevant departments (ie, Eskom to the department of energy, Transnet to the department of transport, etc). For more detail on what other changes could happen, read the full story on the Mail & Guardian. Echoing reports which emerged over the past week, the ministers targeted for axing include many which have been implicated in state capture. According to the M&G report, here’s how the shuffle is expected to go: Who might go Social Development minister Bathabile Dlamini;
Water Affairs minister Nomvula Mokonyane;
Co-operative Governance minister Des van Rooyen;
Mineral Resources minister Mosebenzi Zwane;
Public Service minister Faith Muthambi;
Finance minister Malusi Gigaba. Who might stay Trade and Industry minister Rob Davies;
Economic Development minister Ebrahim Patel;
Science and Technology minister Naledi Pandor;
Human Settlements minister Lindiwe Sisulu;
Health minister Aaron Motsoaledi;
Deputy Health minister Joe Phaahla. Who mighty come in ANC NEC member Thoko Didiza;
Former KwaZulu-Natal premier Senzo Mchunu;
Former deputy justice minister Thabang Makwetla;
ANC MP Mondli Gungubele;
Former ANC spokesperson Zizi Kodwa;
ANC chief whip Jackson Mthembu;
Former finance minister Pravin Gordhan;
Former finance minister Trevor Manuel;
Former deputy finance minister Mcebisi Jonas;
Former tourism minister Derek Hanekom;
ANC chairperson Gwede Mantashe. Read: This is how much Ramaphosa could earn as president in 2018 and beyond