Land Rover and Bullitt Group have unveiled details of the Land Rover Explore Outdoor smartphone. Designed for people who live for adventure and need a phone that can survive tough conditions, the smartphone will be on show at Mobile World Congress 2018, in Barcelona. At the heart of the phone is a 4000mAh battery that gives two days of typical use, or a full day of activities, with constant GPS Navigation mapping activated on the 5” HD display. Battery life can also be doubled by adding the included Adventure Pack while on the go. Once added, it can replace the need for a separate GPS device with its GPS patch antenna that improves the reliability and accuracy of the GPS. It also adds additional 3600 mAh of battery power and premium topographic mapping with skyline augmented reality, courtesy of ViewRanger. Other hardware packs available include a large 4370mAh additional battery and a universal bike mount, all designed to enhance any adventure by enabling owners to go further, and stay out for longer. It is drop tested to 1.8 metres with a factory fitted screen protector, it can survive underwater, including salt water, complying to IP68 rating and can cope with extreme temperatures, thermal shock, humidity and vibration exposure. The home screen features a customisable outdoor dashboard for instant access to weather condition information and sensor data from the device. It can be set up to show the details most relevant to any activity at a glance. Separately, the Explore Hub is a curated app portal, with a content catalogue relevant to many outdoor activities, as well as the Land Rover InControl apps. Notable features also include a bright 5-inch full HD screen that’s optimised for sunlight legibility, while the touchscreen can be controlled with wet fingers or while wearing gloves. Improved connectivity options are provided by a dual SIM feature, giving users the ability to connect to two networks.      Read: Jaguar Land Rover reveals first ever plug-in hybrid electric vehicle