Dion Wired is offering a range of Canon cameras and lenses in their Dion Wired Wednesday deals sale at great discounts – for today only. The available deals will appeal to new-found photography hobbyists and decade-long professionals alike. Cameras, lenses, and bundles on sale today are listed below. To get these deals today, or for more information, visit the Dion Wired website. Click here to view the deal.  The Canon 80D Body offers versatile focal range, 4-stop optical image stabilizer, and easily adjustable zoom speed for optimum control. With impressive speed, instinctive controls, and innovative technologies, this versatile Wi-Fi DSLR is ideal for exploring new areas of photography. Click here to view the deal.  The Canon 700D bundle allows you to keep up with fast moving action, while providing touchscreen control, Scene Intelligent Auto, and low light performance – plus you get a 2-year warranty. Click here to view the deal.  Ideal for everyday use, this compact system camera allows for DSLR performance in a beautifully simple body. The kit includes a standard zoom 15-45mm EF-M IS lens with autofocus, and thanks to its strong movie-making capabilities, it makes for one of the top cameras for vlogging. Click here to view the deal.  With 3 frames per second shooting, you can effortlessly capture distinctive DSLR quality pictures and cinematic Full HD movies using the 18MP EOS 1300D. Share instantly with the Canon 1300D using Wi-Fi and connect to your compatible smart device using NFC. A 2-year warranty is included. Click here to view the deal.  This stylish, ultra-slim connected camera offers a versatile 10x optical zoom for simple shooting, great results, and easy sharing wherever you go. It also offers 20MP, 720p HD Movie filming and intelligent image stabilisation – plus you get a 1-year guarantee. Click here to view the deal.  The first true Macro lens in the EF-S series offers 60mm focal length range, high corner-to-corner resolution, fast auto-focus with near-silent USM, and Super Spectra coatings to reduce ghosting and flare. This deal includes a 2-year warranty. Click here to view the deal.  The EF-S 10-18mm f/4.5-5.6 IS STM offers an ultra-wide perspective allowing for imposing architecture and expansive landscapes capturing. Click here to view the deal. This wide aperture lens allows for high-quality portraits and low-light photos used with DSLR. With the EF 50mm f/1.8 STM lens, artistic and impactful photography is easily produced thanks to a wide f/1.8 aperture that produces sharp focus on your subject and a blurred background.  This article was published in partnership with Dion Wired.