With thousands of South Africans trusting Uber to get them around their city safely every day, it can be easy to forget that the company also has a responsibility to thousands of driver-partners who rely on Uber’s service for their livelihoods – safely and flexibly. As part of an initiative to become more transparent and to assure safety is maintained at all times, Uber has introduced various actions which provide safety to both driver-partners and riders. “For this reason, Uber is committed to ensuring that the Uber app remains safe for driver-partners and riders to use and it is their goal to make every ride as safe, seamless, and reliable as possible,” the company says. “As more and more people use the Uber app, it is important that everyone knows what goes on behind the scenes when on-boarding driver-partners.” As part of this initiative Uber has released an infographic and new details as to its on-boarding requirements in South Africa: 1. Professional Drivers Permit (PrDP) This is a Professional Driver’s Permit that licenses a Professional Driver to operate legally in South Africa. Uber requires a local, South African, PrDP issued from the Licensing Department. Driver-partners need to undergo a police clearance to obtain their permit. 2. Operators Card (Double disc) The Operator Card (Double Disc) is obtained from the Licensing Department 3. Commercial Insurance with public liability All driver-partners are required to register for Uber with their commercial vehicle insurance and have public liability insurance. Uber also offers rider insurance which is provided by Chubb, a global insurance leader, through their South African subsidiary, Chubb Insurance South Africa Limited. 4. Pass a vehicle inspection (Roadworthy Certificate) All driver-partners must pass a vehicle inspection at an Uber Approved Inspection Centre before taking their first trip and once a year after that. Once a driver-partner passes, they need to upload their readable report to their account and ensure the vehicle registration number matches the vehicle on their Uber profile. 5. Safety Screening All driver-partners have to undergo an AFIS secondary background screening by third-party profession who leads the industry. 6. Driving Evaluation Driver-partners carry hundreds of passengers a month so it is vital they can safely and professionally transport passengers. Drivers will need to complete a driving evaluation with an approved agency before using the app. 7. Uber Information Session This involves completing a course at Uber’s Greenlight Hub support centres, which upon passing, the driver-partner will be activated and able to operate on the Uber app. Driver-partners will also need to attend information sessions, where Uber provides driver-partners with tips on how to give the best customer service to their passengers and explains Uber’s Community Guidelines – clear standards in place that explain what behavior is- and isn’t appropriate- when using the app and what can result in a rider or driver losing access to the Uber app. 8. Time to DRIVE Once the driver-partner has completed all these steps, they’re ready to hit the road. Driver-partners who use the Uber app are totally free to choose if, when and where they accept rider requests; they are not forced to work a required number of hours or shifts. They are their own bosses, with the opportunity to use the Uber app to grow their own business as and when they want. Read: South Africans can expect to do more ‘grocery shopping’ through UberEATS