RS Components the global distributor for engineers, buyers and maintenance professionals will be at the Mining and Technical Exhibition (MTE) Modikwa on 22 February 2018 at the Modikwa Platinum Mine in Limpopo, showcasing a range of RS Pro toolkits for maintenance engineers, technicians and electricians. The Modikwa Platinum Mine is located along the border between Mpumalanga and Limpopo, north west of the town Burgersfort and represents one of the largest platinum reserves in South Africa. In 2017 the mine undertook various activities to improve conditions in its surrounding communities, including the upgrading of the Mamphahlane road for better access to services. The mine is 50% owned by African Rainbow Minerals (ARM) with a 17% stake in ARM Mining Consortium held by two Section 21 companies representing communities around Modikwa. The RS Pro toolkit series includes kits and sets for general electronics applications and kits for maintenance engineers, technicians, mechanics and electricians. It also includes specialist kits such as those for automotive applications, along with VDE kits for high-voltage electrical applications, as well as sets of precision pliers. Designed to help enable the reduction of working time and improved efficiency, the application-specific toolkits are designed to be an excellent starting point for engineers or technicians with all the basic tools for a particular industry application, or even as a replacement toolkit for experienced users. Exclusively available from RS Components, the RS Pro range offers an ever-expanding series of more than 50,000 quality-tested products engineered for manufacturing and industrial environments. All RS Pro tools are backed by the RS Seal of Approval and have a three-year warranty. To find out more about the RS Pro range please go to www.rspro.com Download brochures here: http://bit.ly/RSGuides. Visit the RS Components stand at MTE Modikwa on 22 February 2018 from 12:00 to 16:00 at the Modikwa Platinum Mine. This article was published in partnership with RS Components.