Samsung has launched its flagship Galaxy S9 and S9+ smartphones at Mobile World Congress 2018. The company said the smartphones “reimagine the way people communicate, share, and experience the world”, and pack in an array of awesome features. Many of these new features centre around the devices’ cameras, and Samsung said the Galaxy S9 and S9+ drive innovation with its advanced systems. “Redesigned with a new Dual Aperture lens that powers an innovative low-light camera, super slow-mo video capabilities, and personalised AR Emoji, the Galaxy S9 and S9+ ensure users do not miss a moment,” said Samsung. The Galaxy S9 and S9+ also pack powerful stereo speakers tuned by AKG, audio with Dolby Atmos, and a refined edge-to-edge Infinity Display. Samsung said the new cameras equipped on the S9 and S9+ feature a Super Speed Dual Pixel sensor with dedicated processing power and memory. This lets the devices take: Super slow-mo shots – dynamic, slow-motion video that captures 960 frames per second.
Motion detection – an intelligent feature that detects movement in the frame and automatically begins to record.
Low-light shots – similar to the way the iris of a human eye expands and contracts, Samsung’s Dual Aperture (F1.5/F2.4) automatically lets in more light when it’s dark and less light when it’s too bright.
AR Emoji – create an emoji that looks, sounds, and acts like you. The Galaxy S9 and S9+ also feature an array of software features, including Bixby – Samsung’s intelligence platform – and the SmartThings app, which “unites Samsung’s existing IoT services into one single, smart experience”. Samsung DeX is also available for the new smartphones, in the form of the Dex Pad. The docking system lets users connect the Galaxy S9 and S9+ to a monitor, keyboard, and mouse. Other standout features of the S9 and S9+ include: IP68 water and dust resistance.
Wireless charging.
Expandable memory of up to 400GB with MicroSD.
Knox 3.1 security.
Iris, fingerprint, and facial recognition. The Galaxy S9 and S9+ will be available starting from 16 March, in Midnight Black, Titanium Grey, Coral Blue, and Lilac Purple. Technomobi and Dion Wired have opened pre-orders for the devices. The smartphones – which are set to arrive in South Africa in March – are priced as follows at both retailers: Samsung Galaxy S9 – R15,499
Samsung Galaxy S9+ – R17,999  Read: Samsung targets camera superiority for Galaxy S9