Opposition leader Mmusi Maimane says that ministers in government are drawing massive salaries but don’t know what’s happening in their own departments – and newly elected president Cyril Ramaphosa needs to foster a government that stands for accountability. In his debate speech following Ramaphosa’s State of the Nation Address on Friday, Maimane highlighted how, under former president Jacob Zuma, the government became bloated, with zero accountability from ministers who dropped the ball. He said that at R587 billion for the 2017/18 financial year along, public sector wages are more than half of the entire budget, and way above other emerging economies – a situation which is simply not sustainable. “At 35 ministries, each with a deputy minister, ours one of the most bloated governments in the world,” Maimane said. “It is entirely possible to cut our executive down to 15 ministries, with spending priorities that promote economic growth and job creation. This would save us around R4.7 billion each year,” he said. Maimaine said that although it would be challenging, Ramaphosa could start with ministers who have already “proven themselves” to be corrupt. “Show South Africa you are really serious about fighting corruption in your party and fire Bathabile Dlamini, Faith Muthambi, Mosebenzi Zwane, Malusi Gigaba, Des van Rooyen, David Mahlobo, Lynne Brown and Bongani Bongo,” he said. Weekend reports, citing party insiders, said that Ramaphosa was gearing up for a wide-sweeping cabinet reshuffle that would indeed target many of the ministers who have been implicated in the ongoing Gupta scandals or who have proven to be inefficient in their positions. These include: Water and Sanitation Minister Nomvula Mokonyane;
Social Development Minister Bathabile Dlamini;
Mineral Resources Minister Mosebenzi Zwane;
Cooperative Governance and Traditional Affairs Minister Des van Rooyen;
Public Enterprises Minister Lynne Brown (who may be replaced by Pravin Gordhan);
Finance Minister Malusi Gigaba (who may be replaced by Zweli Mkhize);
Energy Minister David Mahlobo. In his inaugural State of the Nation Address on Friday, Ramaphosa made it clear that there would be some restructuring of government. “We will…initiate a process to review the configuration, number and size of national government departments,” the president said. He said that it is critical that the structure and size of the state is optimally suited to meet the needs of the people and ensure the most efficient allocation of public resources. Before the SONA, worker union Cosatu also appealed to president Ramaphosa to cut his cabinet in half, and to stop allowing ministers to live “bling lifestyles”. Cosatu also called for all “captured” ministers to be fired immediately. Read: Who could be out in Ramaphosa’s first cabinet reshuffle: report