Anti-corruption non-profit Forensics for Justice has put up a R100,000 reward for any information that leads to the arrest of Ajay Gupta within 48 hours (18h00, Saturday). South Africa’s elite investigative unit the Hawks have confirmed that the Gupta patriarch is now considered a fugitive on the run after failing to turn himself in to authorities. Gupta is wanted on charges relating to the Free State dairy farm project which is subject to investigations around fraud, corruption and money laundering. The Gupta family and their associates – including government officials – allegedly received over R100 million in funds unlawfully through the project, which only got 1% of the reported R220 million budgeted to get the farming project going. Eight accused, including former Oakbay chief executives Varun Gupta and Nazeem Howa, as well as current its CEO Ronica Ragavan, we arrested in a Hawks raid on Wednesday morning. They appeared in the Bloemfontein Magistrates Court on Thursday, where they applied for and were granted bail for between R10,000 and R200,000. According to the FFJ, the R100,000 reward is being offered in the interests of justice, so that Ajay Gupta does not escape South Africa, and all information received is being shared with the authorities. According to a report by The Times, Ajay Gupta is avoiding the police by hopping from property to property and using burner phones to counter any tracking attempts. He is also reportedly being protected by armed guards. While the Hawks have officially named the Gupta patriarch as a fugitive, The Times reports that his brothers Atul and Rajesh (Tony) are also on their radar. South Africa’s borders have reportedly been put on high alert, while airports and ports are being monitored. “We need as many people as possible to step up and help find Ajay Gupta. While it is extremely unlikely that any of the Gupta family will ever come back to South Africa voluntarily, we at Forensics for Justice believe that the one that’s here, must stay here and face the music. As a result of the reward, we have already started receiving information, which we have passed on to the Hawks,” FFJ said. Anyone with information can contact the group at 0800 118 118 or tweet them @FfJZA or e-mail sarah.trent@forensicsforjustice.org. Read: Arrests made as Hawks raid the Guptas: report