Dark Fibre Africa (DFA), a provider of open-access fibre infrastructure, says it has been in exploratory discussions with the government of Zimbabwe regarding the deployment of fibre networks in the country. Bulawayo24.com reported that DFA has committed $60 million (R710 million) to the country’s communication technology industry for the next five years, citing a social media post by a cabinet minister. Minister of ICT, Postal & Cyber Security, Supa Mandiwanzira, said on Twitter: “Glad to have met officials of DFA Zimbabwe, a Remgro investment, who have committed USD60m investment in open access metro fibre networks in the next five years. USD9m will be spent in Harare this year. New investment.” “As per the Zimbabwe based publication, DFA, a unit of Johannesburg Stock Exchange-listed investment holding company Remgro Investment, confirms that the company has been in exploratory discussions with the government of Zimbabwe,” DFA told BusinessTech. It stressed that in its normal course of business, it actively identifies and evaluates opportunities for growth and expansion into adjacent markets. “We have always managed requests of expansion in the best interests of the company while ensuring that we remain committed to our strategy and defined operating model,” said Thinus Mulder, CEO at DFA. The infrastructure firm told MyBroadband in December, that it will continue to expand its fibre footprint in 2018 – increasing its reach into small towns and buildings in South Africa. Vino Govender, acting chief strategy officer at DFA, said the group is also placing more focus on the customer experience, which is at the centre of it organisational initiatives. “Based on this, we have implemented several projects, including catalogue-driven order management as well as multi-domain service orchestration.” This strategy is set to flow into 2018, with DFA remaining focused on “delivering an exceptional customer experience”. Read: Fibre infrastructure firm DFA raises R1.25 billion in funding