Huawei South Africa Consumer Business Group (CBG) has launched its all new Huawei P smart mobile phone with full view display and a dual camera setup. “Huawei P smart continues the design language of the sought-after P Series characterised by simplicity and elegance – a slim metallic body, flat smooth rear surface, with striking aesthetics. The exquisite smartphone with personalized photography functions will be available in black and gold colors,” the group said in a press release on Tuesday. The Huawei P smart is available for purchase at all operators in South Africa from 13th February 2018, at a recommended retail price (RRP) of R3,999 at all operators. “Our new P smart brings you flagship features at an affordable price. It’s the first time the industry will see both a dual camera and full view display at this price range and we are excited to introduce this to the South African market,” said Likun Zhao GM, Huawei Consumer Business. The company said that the enhanced camera qualities provide advanced bokeh effects (soft out) and unique photography functions, such as the beauty camera and gesture shot. The smartphone also introduces four intelligent sensing functions- facial recognition, gender recognition, 10-level skin improvement and automatic perception. “The P Smart skillfully hides three antennas in the upper and lower parts of the metallic body to avoid the traditional three-section design’s impact on body aesthetics while ensuring seamless communication experience. With an ingenious architecture and a beautiful body with 2.5D curved screen design, Huawei P smart feels even more compact and comfortable in hand,” it said. The smartphone also features a one-touch split-screen mode supporting the simultaneous running of two apps. Huawei P smart also includes the new EMUI 8.0 operating system (OS) (based on Android 8.0). It features Kirin 659 processor made with a process for mid-range and high-end chips characterized by better energy performance. The new phone series is equipped with Fingerprint 4.0 solution, fingerprint recognition within 0.3 seconds bringing an enhanced user experience. “In order to enhance the battery life of smartphones with a full view, Huawei P smart features a 3,000-mAh battery in combination with the Intelligent Power-saving technology 6.0, which supports background real-time detection of power-hungry apps, comprehensive power consumption test and one-key optimization to save power significantly and help extend battery life greatly,” Huawei said.  Read: Huawei to launch mobile app store in SA