Datacentrix recently hosted an annual ‘Tech Conference’ held by the IT department of long-term client, Barloworld Automotive. “The Barloworld Automotive IT department delivers shared services primarily across the Automotive Group and arranges a yearly technology day to keep the entire IT fraternity up to date with the latest trends and offerings within the ICT marketplace. The event has become a landmark day on the company’s annual agenda, and it is a great accolade for Datacentrix to be invited as host for the first time,” explains Francois Jacobs, senior account manager at Datacentrix. With an informative, full day’s agenda, Datacentrix’ chief digital strategist, Rudie Raath, followed an introduction by Mark Tarlton, Group Chief Information Officer of Automotive, taking delegates on a journey into the future of technology and looking at the commercial viability of automation, artificial intelligence, machine learning, and more. Datacentrix partners HPE, Intuity, Lenovo, and Pfortner also each addressed attendees, continuing with the theme of digital innovation and transformation. In addition, Datacentrix security business unit manager, Wayne Olsen, looked into local cyber-security threats, while its eNetworks chief operating officer, Jaap Scholten, spoke on the art of connected data through low-cost IoT (Internet of Things) networks. Says Jacobs: “It was a real honour for Datacentrix to have reached a point in our partnership with Barloworld Automotive, which began more than six years ago, that we have been entrusted to run with this well-regarded Tech Conference. The day provided us with the opportunity to demonstrate our relevance, capabilities and deep technology understanding to the broader Barloworld community, which included CIOs, technical staff, and management, and procurement teams.” From humble beginnings to a strategic partnership, here is a look at the development of Datacentrix’ relationship with Barloworld Automotive over the years: Longstanding relationship dating back to 2011.
       Veritas NetBackup support and services partner since 2011.
       Microsoft System Center Configuration Manager (SCCM) upgrade project in 2012. Today, five years later, this is a fully managed service.
       Security assessment in 2012.
       IBM Tape Library support since 2013.
       Cisco Network Core Design and replacement 2014.
       Cisco Wireless Blueprint design and implementation with centralised management for the group.
       Barloworld Equipment Outsource partner for end user computing and service desk since 2016.
       Lenovo end-user computing fulfilment partner for the next three years (2017).
       HP Enterprise equipment fulfilment since 2016. For more information, visit the Datacentrix website. This article was published in partnership with Datacentrix.