Australia’s Department of Immigration and Border Protection (DIBP) has updated its list of jobs which skilled South Africans can apply for when looking to emigrate. The jobs are broken down into two categories and fall under either the Medium and Long-term Strategic Skills List (MLTSSL) or the Short‑term Skilled Occupation List (STSOL). To qualify for skilled migration to Australia, you must now nominate an occupation from the MLTSSL. However, if you are applying for skilled migration via nomination by a State or Territory Government (temporary visa); you have the option of nominating an occupation from the STSOL. A number of these jobs also have additional caveats which typically limit where emigrants can move to in Australia and how much they earn. Changes South Africans looking to emigrate to Australia and New Zealand were dealt a massive blow earlier in 2017, when the countries’ governments suddenly tightened their visa laws. In April, Australian Prime Minister Malcolm Turnbull announced that he would be abolish the country’s popular temporary work visa system and increase the standards of its citizenship test with immediate effect, to promote “Australia first” values. The new requirements for citizenship will now require candidates to be permanent residents for at least four years (as opposed to the previous one-year requirement), applicants must be competent English speakers, must show a job record and prove they have integrated into the local community. Turnbull also announced that he would be replacing the country’s popular temporary 457 work visa programme to focus on creating jobs for Australians first. The result was a culling of more than 200 jobs from the previous list and the release of the new updated MLTSSL and STSOL lists. You can find the complete updated MLTSSL list for 2018 detailed below. You can find a combined list including STSOL qualifications here. *indicates jobs marked with a caveat. Read: Uptick in South Africans selling their homes to leave the country