A new report by sales software company, Pipedrive, has found that South Africans are currently the best salespeople in the world. The report was based on metadata collected by Pipedrive on over 70,000 organisations, across 34 different countries and over 10 industries. “One thing that makes all businesses similar is their use of a process that gets them a customer,” said Timo Rein, CEO of Pipedrive. “Every company follows some sort of a step-by-step path that has proven successful to them. The way salespeople perform along their chosen process is what makes businesses of different shapes and kinds comparable and therefore becomes the centre point of our analysis.” In particular, the report tried to answer three questions: How many of their potential prospects salespeople manage to convert to customers?
How long it takes them to do it?
How hard they need to work for it? (read: how many activities they need to engage in. An activity is any scheduled action e.g. a phone call or meeting) For the second year running, South Africa was named at the top of the conversion rate league table – followed closely by the the Republic of Ireland and New Zealand –  which were the only nations where salespeople are able to close north of 20% of their prospects into customers. In speaking to a number of South African organisations, Rein said that the high rate of closing did not seem to surprise them. “They see an unusually straight link between making it in sales and being able to survive,” said Rein. “This top-three African economy apparently has less of a safety net in the form of welfare and more pressure to succeed. Many people point to a ‘if you don’t kill, you don’t eat’ metaphor. It’s arguably a case of an environment shaping the people operating in it. “South Africans also have a reputation for directness and an aversion to small talk,” he said. “They get to the point quickly. When it comes to the sales data, it does seem like South Africans understand the lay of the land far earlier in the sales process, that is, knowing when to ‘step on it,’ and also when to throw in the towel.” Quickest to ‘yes’  Read: Some companies could be exempt from having to pay SA’s new minimum wage