The ANC has announced that it will be recalling Jacob Zuma as president. At a press briefing on Tuesday, ANC secretary general Ace Magashule said that the ANC’s NEC decided to recall Zuma in the interests of bringing stability to the South African political landscape. Magashule however, did not give a time-frame as to when this process would happen. According to Magashule, during deliberations Zuma on Monday, the president requested that he be given three to six months to vacate the office; however the ANC’s top six stressed that it needed to move with urgency, so as not to lose the momentum gained at the end of last year, when new leadership was elected. South Africa has experienced an extended period of uncertainty around Zuma’s role as president in light of Cyril Ramaphosa’s victory in the party’s December conference where he emerged as its new leader. The ANC’s top six reportedly approached Zuma in early February with a request that he step aside and allow for Ramaphosa to take power in preparation for the 2019 general elections. It was argued that the ANC could not unite behind a singular campaign while there were two centers of power in the party. However, Zuma defiantly challenged the ANC’s leadership to try and remove him if they could, according to insiders. This led to a succession of meetings being set up, postponed and behind the scenes talks taking place, which ultimately saw both the State of the Nation Address, as well as the emergency ANC NEC meeting meant to recall Zuma, being postponed over the past week. Before the ANC’s announcement on Tuesday, the rand was trading around R11.94 to the dollar – a stronger position than the closes seen in the preceding week, where uncertainty over Zuma’s fate still lingered. Shortly after the announcement the local unit traded in slightly negative territory against the major currencies. Dollar/Rand: R11.93 (0.07%)
Pound/Rand: R16.57  (0.54%)
Euro/Rand: R14.72  (0.42%) It was a matter of time The cards have been heavily stacked against the president, with markets already pricing in his exit into the rand. The currency had experienced the biggest emerging market climb since the start of the year, thanks predominantly to Ramaphosa’s rise, and more positive sentiment in the wake of his shift to fighting corruption and restoring business confidence. However, Ramaphosa’s talk of cleaning up corruption has been stunted by Zuma’s evident firm grip on power, where many see the former ANC leader as the prime suspect in many dodgy dealings. Zuma has been heavily implicated in state capture, where it has been alleged that the Gupta family – the central figures in the saga, and personal friends of the president – used their relationship and proximity to the top office to secure lucrative government contract. The president has also been hounded by fraud and corruption charges. The full statement from the ANC is quoted below: Read: The Zuma announcement is holding the rand to ransom