The reward pool for information leading to the arrest of the Gupta brothers and former president Jacob Zuma’s son Duduzane, has now been boosted to R1 million. This follows the announcement from the non-profit, Forensics for Justice this week that a R100,000 would be paid out for information leading the arrest of Ajay Gupta, who is considered a fugitive on the run by the Hawks. On Saturday, FFJ put out a further notice, adding a R100,000 reward each for Ajay Gupta’s alleged conspirators, namely his brothers Atul Gupta and Rajesh (Tony) Gupta, as well as their business associate Duduzane Zuma. If all four are arrested on the same information, a further bonus of R100,000 will be paid out, FFJ said, bringing the total to R500,000. Responding to the FFJ’s reward, CEO of Sygnia, vocal critic of the Guptas and state capture opponent, Magda Wierzycka said she would match the reward, rand for rand, effectively doubling the total reward pool to R1 million. “South Africans, contribute your spy skills. We need these crooks in jail where they belong. As soon as possible,” she said.  Despite calls for information relating to the arrest of the other Gupta brothers, so far the Hawks have only confirmed that there is a manhunt on to arrest Ajay Gupta, the patriarch of the family. Hawks spokesperson Brigadier Hangwani Mulaudzi confirmed on Friday that Ajay was in the country and that the unit was negotiating with the security company protecting him. However, he dismissed reports that Atul and Rajesh were also being sought. Ajay Gupta and Duduzane Zuma are wanted in connection with the Free State dairy project that is currently at the centre of fraud, corruption and money laundering charges against Free State government and Gupta associates. The Gupta family and their associates – including government the officials – allegedly received over R100 million in funds unlawfully through the project, which only got 1% of the reported R220 million budgeted to get the farming project going. Eight accused, including former Oakbay chief executives Varun Gupta and Nazeem Howa, as well as current its CEO Ronica Ragavan, we arrested in a Hawks raid on Wednesday morning. They appeared in the Bloemfontein Magistrates Court on Thursday, where they applied for and were granted bail for between R10,000 and R200,000. “We need as many people as possible to step up and help find Ajay Gupta. While it is extremely unlikely that any of the Gupta family will ever come back to South Africa voluntarily, we at Forensics for Justice believe that the one that’s here, must stay here and face the music. As a result of the reward, we have already started receiving information, which we have passed on to the Hawks,” FFJ said. Anyone with information can contact the group at 0800 118 118 or tweet them @FfJZA or e-mail sarah.trent@forensicsforjustice.org. Read: R100,000 reward for info leading to the arrest of Ajay Gupta