South Africa’s largest private security company, Fidelity ADT, has announced two new security-focused smart home services in South Africa. The lighter, lower-end product is called ‘SecureHome’ and will effectively act as a keypad for your security system outside of the home. In contrast, the more advanced product, ‘SecureConnect’, essentially turns your house into a full-on smart home, offering not only a range of security features but also the ability to turn off other IOT devices such as a pool-pumps, security lights and even your coffee machine. The products are available to the general market as of Monday 26 February, and are available to purchase nation-wide. SecureHome “SecureHome enables you to view the status of your home security, quickly arm or disarm your alarm system, and receive alerts,” said Stuart Clarkson, Fidelity ADT managing executive. According to Clarkson, modern South African consumers are shifting towards wanting more control of their home and home security. “Identifying this gap in the South African market, we are proud to announce that we are launching this exciting new offering which takes home automation to the next level,” he said. He explained that SecureHome will be modular in nature so that customers can customise their level of home security and add onto the product as their budget and needs change “A customer may just want to start by being able to remotely arming and disarming their alarm, but later they can include additional features like opening or closing the gate or garage. “These features not only provide convenience but also further enhance home security because it negates the need to stop and wait in front of your gate and also allows our customer to safely be notified when there is a problem. They can then see for themselves what that problem is,” he said.  SecureConnect While Fidelity ADT’s SecureConnect product has much of the same functionality as SecureHome, it also offers a number of clear technological advancements. This includes everything from geolocation so that your alarm automatically arms when you are 5 km away from home, to customers being able to actively monitor their homes through live-feed cameras on their mobile phone, Clarkson said. “A customer may just want to start by being able to remotely view what’s happening at home, or arming and disarming their alarm, but later they can include additional features like switching on and off devices and viewing their cameras,” he said. “These features not only provide convenience but also further enhance home security, because it creates the appearance that someone is home and also allows our customer to safely be notified when there is a problem. They can then see for themselves what that problem is.” As with SecureHome, all signals are still prioritised and managed by the Fidelity ADT monitoring centre. Read: Robbery, hijacking and break-in crime trends in South Africa in 2018