Jaguar Land Rover has introduced the option of a Guaranteed Future Value (GFV) finance product in South Africa – giving customers the opportunity to drive a new Jaguar or Land Rover every three or four years. The new product will mean that buyers will know right from the start of their finance contract what the guaranteed future value of their Jaguar or Land Rover will be, said Viola Rossouw, financial services manager at Jaguar Land Rover South Africa. This will allow them to go ahead with an option to either renew, retain or return the vehicle at the end of a pre-determined term, she said. “This product will appeal to a changing customer – a customer who wants no risk at the end of the term. A customer not interested in ownership but rather ‘usership’. A customer who wants to drive a new vehicle every three or four years,” she said. According to Rossouw, the customer must first select a preferred Jaguar or Land Rover, choosing the period of use, distance (km) and deposit. At the end of the term, a customer will then have three options: Renew Prior to the date on which the GFV is due and payable – and provided that the customer has paid all other amounts owing, including any arrears and/or arrear interest – the customer may elect to trade the vehicle in for another Jaguar or Land Rover. In the event that the vehicle is sold for more than the GFV amount, any surplus amount can be applied towards the purchase of the new vehicle. Retain If the customer elects to purchase the vehicle then, prior to the date on which the GFV is due and payable, the customer will be called upon to settle the GFV as well as any arrears, arrear interest or any other amounts payable. The customer also has the option to refinance the vehicle. Return The customer may elect to return the vehicle to a Jaguar Land Rover Retailer at the end of the chosen contract term, provided that the customer has paid up all other amounts owing, including any arrears and/or arrear interest and that the vehicle complies with the conditions of use. Jaguar Land Rover Jaguar Land Rover remains a popular option for South African motorists, with the 486 cars sold in June making it one of the 15 most popular manufacturers in the country. Notably, Land Rover’s Discovery has featured prominently on the list of best-selling SUVs for the first half of the year, while the Range Rover Sport and Range Rover Velar also feature on the list of best-selling SUV/crossovers. Other popular vehicles from the group include the Range Rover Evoque, the Jaguar E-Pace, Jaguar F-Pace and the Jaguar F-Type. Read: The difference between your car’s ‘book’ and ‘trade’ value – and how to get more when selling