When asked ‘what’s keeping you up at night?’, a number of senior HR executives from several multinational companies agreed that one thing qualified – prospective employees misrepresenting themselves, from their background to qualifications. This follows a recent panel discussion at the Employment Law Alliance Conference in Johannesburg. The panelists all agreed that legal restrictions on what information companies can legitimately ask prospective new hires have increased. In addition, there has been an increasing trend – observed over the past 18 months – in prospective candidates not disclosing everything about their career history and skills – “only for the truth to come out in the wash,” they said. “In interviews with prospective employers, candidates do not necessarily reveal that they are in litigation with their previous company, or that they faced disciplinary action for sexual harassment,” said Lusanda Raphulu, partner of Employment and Benefits Practice at Bowmans. “They choose not to volunteer it, because this information could jeopardise their chances of landing the position. Such information will more than likely not be unearthed during the standard checks that recruiters may do, such as checking driving history and criminal records. “It may also remain undetected during reference checks,” she said. Restrictions on reference checks According to Raphulu, the reason for these problems is that it is becoming increasingly difficult to conduct effective reference checks. “Restrictions on the disclosure of personal information mean individuals and companies are becoming more constrained in what they say about third parties,” she said. “Also, for various reasons, many companies no longer give out references about former employees and will only say that the person worked for them for a certain period.” Further, employers are increasingly wary about asking candidates to give their own references as they may provide referees whom they know and are close to, she said. “This vacuum has prompted some employers to pursue other avenues – all within the letter of the law – to get to the ‘guts’ of a prospective recruit’s employment history.” “For example, before making a key employment decision, the HR executive might approach other senior executives in the company to find out if they know of the person concerned. After all, industry sectors in South Africa and most other African countries tend to be small, and most mid- to senior-level people will know someone who knows someone.” According to Raphulu, some employers have taken conscious decisions not to protect former employees who leave under a cloud. For example, one panellist said that if his company were asked for a reference about a former employee who had used the company credit card fraudulently, it would tell the inquirer that this was the reason for his or her departure. “In this way, employers whose own fingers have been burnt can help prevent another company from feeling the same pain. Fact is, employing someone who has not been open about their past can have severe consequences,”she said. Another example that panellists mentioned is the impact on existing employees of the appointment of someone whose history of sexual harassment comes out after the fact. With the advent of the #MeToo campaign, such situations could flare up in ways that can ravage a company’s reputation. Dealing with the aftermath Panellists emphasised that how they dealt with the aftermath of an untruth would depend on whether or not deliberate or malicious intent had come into play. If there was deliberate intent to deceive, employers would be much more inclined to pursue the matter. However, there was also a feeling that companies generally were far too quick to allow senior managers who had misrepresented themselves to settle and resign. Without transparency, it is all too easy for the cycle to continue, to the detriment of future employers. “Third parties who give distorted references to aid someone else in fraudulently getting a job should also face the consequences,” said Raphulu. “It hasn’t happened yet in South Africa, but the day is surely coming when an employer will sue for an untrue reference,” she said. Read: The rarest job skills in South Africa right now – and how much they pay