Mercedes-Benz South Africa has launched the new edition of its most successful model series, the C-Class, to the local market. The new edition ‘boasts a wealth of enhancements’, including a a redesigned front-end, with new-look headlamps and tail lamps, the carmaker said. The electronics are completely new, with safety and driver assistance systems now at the level of the flagship S Class series. There are also new petrol and diesel engines across the range, Mercedes said. The current generation C-Class was Mercedes-Benz’ top-selling model, selling more than 415,000 cars worldwide in 2017. The new C-Class also has a strong local flavour, being built in Mercedes-Benz East London plant. The secret of the C-Class’s success is partly down to the wide model range, also including two sporty two-door versions: the Coupé and the Cabriolet, which have opened up entire new audiences in the local market, said Selvin Govender, marketing director of Mercedes-Benz Cars South Africa. “This new model is our sportiest and most dynamic C-Class to date, and with its looks, safety and performance, we’re confident it’s going to appeal to a broader audience than ever before,” said Govender. The exterior The new-look C-Class boasts a new front, and a new design of the headlamps and tail lights. The sedan features the diamond grille as standard in combination with the AMG Line, with front bumpers redesigned for all lines, and rear bumpers varying according to the selected equipment and engine variant. The C-Class comes with LED High Performance headlamps featuring a particularly striking interior design. For the first time in this model series, Multibeam LED headlamps with ultra range high beam are also available. Interior design The new C-Class features a brand new electronic architecture, with the major addition being the latest Mercedes-Benz driving assistance systems. “This puts the new series on a par with the S-Class, providing a higher level of active safety than ever and the ability to drive semi-autonomously in even more situations,” Mercedes said. The interior has also been given a facelift. “The sporty interior’s centre console is characterised by an elegant flowing trim element, with the option of new materials: open-pore brown walnut or open-pore anthracite oak. “The new Multicontour Seat package now literally offers a massage: the side bolsters and lumbar support can be individually adjusted by means of an electrically driven pneumatic pump, with a massage effect in the lumbar area available through air chambers which are inflated and deflated in a pulsing motion.” The car’s new display concept includes an optional, fully-digital 12.3-inch instrument cluster, and the upgraded infotainment system includes standard smartphone integration that can be accessed through touch-sensitive controls in the steering wheel, which respond to swiping motions like the screen of a smartphone. The operation of Distronic and cruise control with controls directly on the steering wheel is another new feature. New engines The new C-Class sees the launch of a new generation of four-cylinder petrol engines. There is a new 4-cylinder, 1.5-litre turbo-petrol engine in the C200, with 9-speed automatic transmission across the range. The 1.5-litre engine is supplemented with a 48-volt on-board network and the EQ Boost integrated starter-generator that produces an additional 10 kW and 160 Nm while accelerating. There’s also a new-generation 2.0-litre turbo petrol engine in the C300, with outputs of 190kw and 370Nm. The new 1.6-litre variant of the current diesel engine family will celebrate its world premiere in the C-Class. The C 220 d 4MATIC providing a healthy 143 kW and 400 Nm. There’s also more performance for the mighty range-topping C43 4MATIC, which boasts a V6 biturbo engine that combines powerful output with low consumption and emissions. For the new C-Class, the AMG development engineers have increased the output of the 3.0-litre V6 engine by 17 kW to 287 kW. The peak torque of 520 Nm is available from 2,500 to 5,000 rpm. Another new feature is the automatic notification if the vehicle suffers an impact caused by another vehicle when parked, is towed away or there is a break-in attempt. The highly sensitive sensors of the standard “Anti-theft alarm system (ATA)” can detect such situations and immediately send a “push notification” message to the Mercedes me app. Price Mercedes-Benz C180 – R586,500
Mercedes-Benz C200 – R613,500
Mercedes-Benz C180 Edition-C – R638,553
Mercedes-Benz C220d – R651,000
Mercedes-Benz C300 – R716,000
Mercedes-AMG C63 S – R1,435,281
Mercedes-AMG C43 4MATIC – R916,268
Mercedes-AMG C43 4M – R948,500      Read: Mercedes-Benz X-Class bakkie – South Africa prices