The upcoming Powerball draw is currently promising a R61 million jackpot, while you can expect a R32 million jackpot from this weekend’s national Lotto draw. Despite promising a big win to the lucky few, the odds of actually winning the lottery are incredibly slim, with the return on spend being the worst in the gambling industry. When BusinessTech tackled the odds of winning the Lottery six years ago, we found that you had a 1 in 13,983,816 chance of winning, with any one player needing to spend almost R49 million for a guaranteed win (buying 14 million tickets at R3.50 a pop). Since then, the odds have become even worse. The national Lottery has included a number of new games (including Powerball and Powerball Plus), and shifted the odds for the Lotto by increasing the number of ball from 49 to 52 in 2017. According to the National Lotto website, this means that there are now 20,358,520 different combinations that one can play when choosing 6 out of 52 numbers. With the cost of a single play now at R5, this means you would have to spend R101,792,600 for a guaranteed chance of winning. Naturally these odds decrease if you are not aiming to win the jackpot, but even the best odds (a match of three ball excluding the bonus) are 1 in 71.7 – and the payout for a guaranteed win (R50) doesn’t even come close to what you’d need to spend to get it (R360).  Powerball While your odds of winning the Lotto are incredibly slim, you are even worse off if you are hoping to win the Powerball draw. As per the Lotto, a single Powerball play will cost you R5,00. However there are 42,375,200 different combinations that one can play when choosing 5 out of 50 numbers and 1 out of 20 numbers. This means that you can expect to pay R211,876,000 for a guaranteed chance of winning. The National Lottery does not include the odds of winning lesser prizes in the Powerball in its FAQs, but instead breaks down how the winnings are calculated.  Why the Lotto is a really bad bet The Lotto and Powerball prize pools are calculated at 50% and 48% of total sales, respectively – which means for every R1 you spend on the game, you have a chance to get 50 cents and 48 cents back. This effective 50%/52% loss on what you pay is referred to as the ‘house edge’ in most casino games, which shows how much the casino – or in this case the Lotto – is guaranteed to make on your spending over time. Effectively, the profit made per bet. For games like roulette, the house edge is much lower, around 5% – while games like blackjack and craps can be under 1%. Slot machines carry a wide range, but can be as low as 5% and as high as 20%, depending on the machine and game type. While betting on everything to score a win is not a good tactic in any gambling venture, with state lotteries, it is particularly egregious. State lotteries are money-making ventures, and the South African Lotto is no exception. The FAQ says that the Lotto generates revenue that goes to various charities which assist the poor. Ironically, however, it is largely the poor who spend money on tickets, trying to escape poverty. No matter which way you look at it, it’s just a bad bet – and it’s been that way for hundreds of years. Adam Smith best summed up the nature of a lottery in his 1776 book called ‘An Inquiry into the Nature and Causes of the Wealth of Nations’. Read: Here are 23 of the richest people in South Africa