Absa has overhauled its look, changing its logo and colour scheme to one that has been inspired by Africa, marking the shift from a European-owned financial group to a proudly African firm. As previously reported, part of the process involves a logo change, with the bank now adopting a circular logo – as well as moving to a different shade of red. However, it’s not just one shade of red that will be linked to the bank, with African theme running through the new branding and a whole host of warm colours being included.  Along with the new look launching, today also marks the point at which the entire Absa group moves on from being Barclays Africa Limited, and will be trading as Absa Bank Limited. This applies to all its markets. The change will be most notable in the group’s African operations where it has previously been trading as a Barclays brand. In South Africa, the Absa name is already familiar. While Barclays is no longer part of the Absa brand, it remains a partner in the group, and still has a 14.9% shareholding in the company. Branding in operations other than South Africa will still hold onto the current Braclays branding for the time being, with all banks across all countries eventually being brought under the Absa branding. This process is subject to regulatory conditions in each market, and is expected to be complete by 2020. <span data-mce-type="bookmark" style="display: inline-block; width: 0px; overflow: hidden; line-height: 0;" class="mce_SELRES_start">﻿</span> New slogan and purpose With the new look, Absa is also moving on from its “Prosper” campaign, adopting two new slogans. The first is “Africanacity”, speaking to the way that the people of Africa always find a way to get things done. This will spearhead the group’s transition to a new Absa – while “Brave. Passionate. Ready.” marks the bank’s attitude.  It has also adopted a new purpose statement – “bringing your possibilities to life”. “This ethos will be the driving force that will define the new Absa, continually inspiring a desired culture that creates opportunities for our customers to make ‘what is possible’ real.” “The new Absa aspires to be an entrepreneurial African banking group with global reach. One that makes a real and lasting contribution to our customers and the societies we operate in,” the bank said. <span data-mce-type="bookmark" style="display: inline-block; width: 0px; overflow: hidden; line-height: 0;" class="mce_SELRES_start">﻿</span> Read: Absa has trademarked a new logo