Global PC shipments totalled 62.1 million units in the second quarter of 2018, a 1.4% increase from the second quarter of 2017, according to preliminary results by Gartner. This is the first quarter of year-over-year global PC shipment growth since the first quarter of 2012, the research and advisory company said. All regions experienced some growth compared with a year ago. While the results are a positive result for the PC industry, Gartner analysts said this sign of market stability is not enough to declare a PC industry recovery just yet. “PC shipment growth in the second quarter of 2018 was driven by demand in the business market, which was offset by declining shipments in the consumer segment,” said Mikako Kitagawa, principal analyst at Gartner. “In the consumer space, the fundamental market structure, due to changes on PC user behaviour, still remains, and continues to impact market growth. Consumers are using their smartphones for even more daily tasks, such as checking social media, calendaring, banking and shopping, which is reducing the need for a consumer PC. “In the business segment, PC momentum will weaken in two years when the replacement peak for Windows 10 passes. PC vendors should look for ways to maintain growth in the business market as the Windows 10 upgrade cycle tails off,” Kitagawa added. With the completion of Lenovo’s joint venture with Fujitsu, three out of four PCs were shipped by the top five PC vendors in the second quarter of 2018. With the inclusion of Fujitsu’s PC shipments due to the joint venture (a formation of Joint Venture with Fujitsu), Lenovo was in a virtual tie with HP Inc for the top spot in the second quarter of 2018 based on global PC shipments. All of the top five PC vendors experienced an increase in worldwide PC shipments in the quarter. HP Inc had its third consecutive quarter of year-over-year PC shipment growth. It maintained steady growth across all regions, except the US. In the other regions, its shipment growth well exceeded the regional averages. Lenovo meanwhile, experienced its highest growth rate since the first quarter of 2015. Read: Top 5 best-selling smartphone brands in the world right now