German car-maker Porsche is strengthening its presence in South Africa with the official opening of a Porsche Studio in Cape Town. Located at the heart of the V&A Waterfront,  the studio is the the first of its kind in the Southern Hemisphere, and is aimed at offering visitors an immersive experience and access to a range of Porsche services. The studio encompasses an area of 420 square metres, with dedicated areas providing insights and highlights from Porsche’s heritage as well as the future of E-Performance with the brand’s first hybrid sports car, the 918 Spyder, temporarily on display. The area features a six-car display space, with the full range of Porsche are available for test-drives. Visitors can also personalise their vehicle of choice on-site at the Trimming and equipment labs, with further tailoring possibilities from Porsche Exclusive Manufaktur also available. Other features include a Carrera Café – which provides a meeting place for the Porsche community – while the Driver’s Selection area offers the latest merchandise for owners and enthusiasts. “Porsche Studios are aimed at providing centrally located destinations that immerse visitors in the world of Porsche,” said Matthias Becker, VP of overseas and emerging markets at Porsche. “As a new concept, they are instrumental in further increasing the attractiveness of our brand, enabling us to reach new enthusiasts and existing customers in their places of interest.” “Thanks to a range of features and innovative digital touchpoints, visitors to Porsche Studio Cape Town Waterfront can interact with the brand like never before,” added Toby Venter, CEO of LSM Distributors, Porsche Centres South Africa. “Here they can learn about Porsche’s past, future and the infinite possibilities currently available with Porsche Exclusive Manufaktur, when personalising their own sports car. We are truly proud of this facility and look forward to welcoming visitors through our doors,” he said.     Read: Top 10 best-selling SUVs and crossovers in South Africa