The University of Johannesburg recently launched four new online-only courses on top of the four master’s degree programmes it unveiled in 2017. Towards the end of last year, UJ launched four online-only master’s degree programmes – a first-of-its-kind for South Africa – with the university adding two bachelor degree courses and two advanced diploma courses to its portfolio. The four new additional online programmes included: Bachelor of Commerce in International Accounting
Bachelor of Human Resource Management
Advanced Diploma in Financial Markets and
Advanced Diploma in Transportation Management. UJ has since published the costs and details for these programmes on its website.  The fees reflect an estimate based on completing all modules of the qualification, first time. They also do not include textbooks, connectivity or laptop or other incidental costs that the student may have to incur. BusinessTech looked at these fees and broke down exactly what you are paying for, below. Bachelor of Human Resources Management The purpose of the Bachelor of Human Resource Management is to equip graduates with an in-depth grounding in human resource management (HRM) knowledge, theory, principles and skills so that they can contribute to the multifunctional, multinational public and business sectors, confidently executing analytical, interpretive, strategic and integrative skills. Total cost: R82,280
Number of modules: 29
Programme credits: 374
Fees per programme credit: R220 Bachelor of Commerce in International Accounting The Bachelor of Commerce in International Accounting is a professionally-oriented and highly relevant online programme that will provide students with an international perspective on global principles of finance and accounting. Potential students are individuals who want to pursue a career as professionals in the broad fields of finance and accounting, but who, owing to financial and geographical barriers, are unable to access contact education, or who would prefer the flexibility that is available through distance provision. Total cost: R90,000
Number of modules: 24
Programme credits: 360
Fees per programme credit: R250 Advanced Diploma in Transportation Management The purpose of the Advanced Diploma in Financial Markets is to develop the student’s knowledge of the discipline of financial markets and trading. The programme is comprised of a focused curriculum to prepare the student for a career in financial markets. The successful student will gain a global and South African financial market perspective and an in-depth understanding of the marketplace which will provide them with a competitive advantage for employment. Total cost: R35,840
Number of modules: 8
Programme credits: 128
Fees per programme credit: R280 Advanced Diploma in Financial Markets The purpose of the Advanced Diploma in Financial Markets is to develop the student’s knowledge of the discipline of financial markets and trading. The programme is comprised of a focused curriculum to prepare the student for a career in financial markets. Mastering of the curriculum will provide students with the ability to synthesise financial market principles and apply financial instruments in a professional manner. The successful student will gain a global and South African financial market perspective and an in-depth understanding of the marketplace which will provide them with a competitive advantage for employment. Total cost: R30,000 (120 credits)/R32,500 (130 credits)
Number of modules: 10 (passed exemption for math)/ 11 (if math module needs to be done)
Programme credits: 120 (passed exemption for math)/ 130 (if math module needs to be done)
Fees per programme credit: R250 Read: University of Pretoria launches virtual campus