Jobs website CareerCast has released a new report on the best ‘green’ jobs to watch right now. The report notes that while ‘green’ as a catch-all adjective that applies to any number of things (including trash, transportation, and the producing and usage of products), it is increasingly being used to describe jobs that inherently benefit the natural world around us. “Some great green-job opportunities allow workers to transition into a future wave without abandoning their current industries. Positions also vary in minimum requirements for entry, while spanning a variety of fields,” it said. “CareerCast’s report jobs finds the projected growth outlook for most ecologically friendly careers at 10% or higher over the next eight years,” it said. “A pair of green jobs in construction and manufacturing – two industries with consistently turbulent hiring for the past three decades – are expected to about double in employment by 2026. “Wind Turbine Technicians are projected to have 96% more job prospects, while Solar Photovoltaic Installers are forecasted for a 105% growth outlook.” While the report is primarily focused on the USA, a number of the listed jobs are currently available in South Africa. Below Businesstech looked at the list of these green jobs, and how much they pay based on data provided by Indeed and Payscale. 1. Biochemist – R185,795 A biochemist is a scientist who works with molecules and compounds, often at a cellular level. They study the way that cells across a variety of biological compounds interact, using this information in association with goals such as creating more effective medications, diagnosing diseases and producing healthier food. Biochemists may work for a wide number of employers, such as pharmaceutical companies, research hospitals, universities and food-producing companies. 2. Biological technician – R145,834 A biological science laboratory technicians can perform a wide range of tasks depending on the type of biological laboratory in which they are employed. A botany lab, for example, will require that the laboratory technician properly care for and manage the plants being studied at the laboratory. The laboratory technician would be responsible for planting seeds, watering plants, maintaining their health and aiding in their reproduction if necessary. The technician would also perform experiments on the plants to fulfill the purposes and studies of the laboratory. 3. Environmental engineer – R357,000 Environmental engineers are technological advisers who help with the growing challenges of land use, pollution, resource regulation and environmental laws. They use technology to help meet these challenges and develop sound solutions. In this way they are vital to helping form public policy to regulate the land, air and water resources for generations to come. Businesses now use environmental engineers to understand how to keep their impact on the environment to a minimum. 4. Hydrologist – R274,832 A hydrologist works for a government agency or a company and studies water itself, water availability, and the water cycle. When relevant problems occur, the hydrologist helps to solve these issues. Some typical issues that are explored are effects from storm surges, floods, and droughts. 5. Meteorologist – R267,463 A meteorologist makes observations and predictions about the weather. These predictions may be passed on to the general public or to clients in fields such as agriculture. The meteorologist will look over numerical and historical data, in order to make predictions. Observing the weather in real time is also often a part of the job. 6. Solar photovoltaic installer – R73,250 Solar energy system installers’ main responsibility is to install solar equipment in residential and commercial buildings. They must make sure that the installation is done properly, as well as provide excellent customer service to the client. These installers generally work with a construction manager to make sure that the installed solar energy system will meet the client’s expectations. Additionally, they must ensure that the warehouse and trucks they use are stocked properly, as well as work effectively in a team setting. They must also work effectively on their own with minimal supervision as well. 7. Sustainability manager – R471,000 Sustainability managers help their companies balance out their impact on the environment, generally by advising management regarding what should be improved to lessen negative impacts. They may also carry out evaluations of departments and operations within the company to determine areas of improvement, such as reducing greenhouse gas emissions, providing more effective modes of transportation, managing waste disposal, reducing the company’s carbon footprint, and conserving energy and water. These evaluations must always be conducted in an objective and professional manner. 8. Wind turbine technician – R270,804 Wind turbine technicians identify, inspect, maintain and repair wind turbines to ensure proper quality control exists. Their goal is to keep maintenance costs low and quality high. Wind turbine technicians assist with the installation of new systems and keep proper documentation of all repairs. Read: 4 tables that show how much South African businesses have transformed over the last 17 years