Professional services company Turner & Townsend recently worked in partnership with Sasol’s Information Management Services (IMS) to develop an integrated IT solution for its new head office in Sandton. The new headquarters accommodate approximately 3,500 of Sasol’s staff, who relocated from 17 previous locations. “This major project is geared to meet Sasol’s present and future requirements as well as allow for global standardisation across the business,” explained Hendrik Engelbrecht, who project managed the information and communication technology project. “It incorporates a high speed fibre optic, wide area network (WAN) to facilitate connectivity to services hosted externally to the Katherine Street premises, and designed to provide the highest possible level of wireless saturation and coverage throughout the building, which includes all basement levels,” he said. He added that technology – such as the latest CAT 7 cables – have been installed to allow Sasol to create an expandable and flexible cabling system that, in the long run, will save them the expense and time of having to re-wire for new features in the future. “In addition, two independent links to different network providers were installed to ensure service availability and resilience, with the total bandwidth capacity of 900 Mb intelligently managed with traffic balanced across the network links,” he said. Very smart While the building boasts impressive internet capabilities, Engelbrecht said that Sasol also had unique requirements. “Importantly, during the design stage, we needed to confirm that the IT design complied with the physical building design and that the network in the new building tied into and integrated with Sasol’s existing global solution,” he said. “During implementation we interacted directly with the property developer and contractor to ensure the build complied with Sasol’s specification. Then in the final stages, we oversaw the relocation of staffs’ technology from screens to phones, and docking stations, assisting with first line of resolution and troubleshooting as all the staff settled in at their new workstations.” Engelbrecht said that the core of the network resides in the building’s 500sqm central equipment room, while each floor besides the ground and first floor has three independent satellite equipment rooms providing localised connectivity. Other key features of the project include a distributed antennae system for high speed 4G (LTE) connection to all Vodacom users throughout the building and a cloud-based Cisco telephony solution, which includes workspace and meeting room conference phones. The project also incorporates security features such as access control; CCTV and alarm monitoring; a parking navigation and guidance system, providing motorists with real-time information which reduces the average time to park; a walk-in IT service centre for users who require assistance; and cutting edge audio visual technology for integrated and automated meeting and teleconference rooms. “The technology implemented is cost effective and all the technology solutions support the overall Green Rating of the building,” said Johanna Malan, lead enterprise information management & information security, for Sasol. “As a global chemicals and energy player with a high performing and mobile workforce, the selection of flexible technology solutions that allow for future growth while delivering on immediate requirements was the imperative,” she said. Read: This Cape Town building just went completely off the water grid