German car maker Volkswagen has teased its smallest crossover vehicle to date, the T-Cross, which is set to come to South Africa upon launch. “The T-Cross is set to launch a new form of SUV from the Volkswagen brand. Presented in 2016 at the Geneva Motor Show as a much-anticipated study, the series version is now making its way in the direction of actual production. With the T-Cross, Volkswagen is expanding the spectrum of Sport Utility Vehicles to include a small model, VW said in a statement. The world première of the new T-Cross will take place in the autumn, VW said, adding that ‘until then, Volkswagen will shorten the waiting time with a first look at the future SUV in the small vehicle class”. “The 4,107-mm-long Volkswagen is designed with charisma, always front-driven, functionally conceptualised, and cleverly constructed. At home in the city, and ready for the small and large adventures both inside and outside the urban jungle,” it said. “The modular transverse matrix (MQB) creates a surprising amount of room. For example, the back seat can be adjusted lengthwise – for more knee room or more room for luggage. The positive influence of the modular transverse matrix affects all areas. “Thus, the T-Cross is entering the market as one of the safest vehicles of its class, guaranteed through excellent crash properties and a large spectrum of assistance systems. Standard on board: the “Front Assist” (ambient traffic monitoring system) and “Lane Assist” (lane departure warning system),” VW said. The T-Cross will head to South Africa upon production, according to Carmag, however, it’s older brother, the T-Roc which was announced in 2017, has not been confirmed yet. VW teased a rear image of the vehicle, along with a Youtube video featuring Jürgen Stackmann, head of sales & marketing, and Klaus Bischoff, head of design of the Volkswagen brand.       <span style="display: inline-block; width: 0px; overflow: hidden; line-height: 0;" data-mce-type="bookmark" class="mce_SELRES_start">﻿</span> Read: A look at 4 awesome new Volkswagen concept cars – including a new bakkie