According to a recent report by property website Lightstone, the suburbs in Gauteng with the highest number of first time buyers include Protea Glen, Weltevreden Park, Lonehill, Paulshof, Bryanston, Equestria, Moreleta Park, Die Hoewes and Sunnyside. In light of this, Seeff asked its area experts in these suburbs to elaborate on the reasons for their popularity, the price range they offer, and why they are ideally suited for first-time buyers. Protea Glen Khosi Sibiya, a Seeff agent in Soweto’s Protea Glen said it comes as no surprise that Protea Glen is right at the top of Lightstone’s list with the highest number of first time home buyers in Gauteng. “Protea Glen is an emerging and sought-after suburb appealing to first time home buyers for many reasons including affordability and fantastic amenities on the suburb’s doorstep,” she said. She added that Protea Glen offers affordable and excellent value for money when compared to many other suburbs in the Johannesburg South region. “Most properties here range between R450,000 and R800,000, but an apartment with two bedrooms, a full bathroom and an open plan lounge and kitchen can be picked up for as low as R290,000,” she said. “A townhouse offering two bedrooms, tile floors, built in cupboards, a lounge, full bathroom and kitchen range from R380,000 to R420,a000 and three bedroom units with built in cupboards, a tiled lounge, full bathroom, fitted kitchen, carport and garden are generally priced between R450,000 and R480,000.” She said that amenities include primary and high schools, shopping centres like the Protea Glen Mall. Randburg Eloisé de Stefanis, residential sales director for Seeff Randburg, said Weltevreden Park offers value for money with entry level prices starting at around R500,000. “For R500,000 – R600,000 the average apartment offers two bedrooms and a bathroom with an open plan kitchen and lounge area with fairly modern finishes. Most apartments are multi-level with a carport. The average size ranges between 55 square metres to 65 square metres,” she said. “From R600,000 to R750,000 buyers may find a simplex unit with a garden and two bathrooms up to 87 square metres, but generally a garden simplex unit costs between R750,000 and R1 million.” De Stefanis said that new developments like Orchid Ridge in the neighbouring suburb of Randpark Ridge also start at R935,000 and a two bedroom unit can be bought for around R1 million. Sandton Charles Vining, Seeff’s MD in Sandton, says the suburbs of Lonehill and Bryanston in the greater Sandton area are both very large suburbs with annual sales exceeding R1 billion. Many large corporate firms have offices in Sandton, which makes Bryanston and Lonehill good choices, but they also offer access to the highway for those working at firms with corporate offices in Midrand or the Johannesburg CBD, he said. He added that several firms now have corporate head offices in the Sunninghill/Woodmead area which are neighbouring suburbs to Lonehill. “Lonehill and Bryanston offer a range of properties, from newer units to those closer to 30 years old. Prices differ vastly too,” he said. “Lonehill starting prices can be as low as R800,000, Bryanston from R1.2 million for an apartment. Between R1 million and R2 million is the norm, but some spectacular sectional title property can be found in Bryanston for around R4 million. There is a lot of choice, which also appeals to first time buyers.” Vining said that their most northern Johannesburg and Midrand suburbs, especially Paulshof also offers great options for first time buyers, working either in Johannesburg, Sandton, Midrand or Pretoria as it offers easy access to the N1 and M1 highway interchanges. “Two or three bedroom apartments can be found in Paulshof at prices under R1,250,000.” Equestria and Moreleta Park Gerhard van der Linde, Seeff’s MD in Pretoria east said both Equestria and Moreleta Park offer a lot to first-time buyers. “Both these areas are considered a great stepping stone for newcomers who wish to establish themselves as real estate owners and may at a later stage upgrade to more expensive property,” said van der Linde. “The sectional title market which ranges between R1 million and R1.5 million is most in demand in these areas. Buyers are able to find units with two and three bedrooms in this price range.” Die Hoewes and Sunnyside Steve van Wyk, Seeff’s MD in Centurion, said Die Hoewes is very popular and has around 6,300 sectional title units ranging in price from a very affordable R545,000 to about R2.4 million, with an average price of R750,000. “Approximately 500 units are sold annually and 38% of the buyers are under the age of 35 years. The appeals to first time buyers lies not only in the fact that Die Hoewes is affordable but it also offers lock up and go units close to major highways, the Gautrain Station and all facilities in Centurion City,” he said. Hayford Obeng, a Seeff agent in Sunnyside, said the suburb is one of the fastest growing suburbs in the real estate business and has good infrastructure and location that appeal to investors and first time home buyers alike. “The average one and two bedroom apartment in Sunnyside is priced around R270,000 and R360,000 respectively. The more expensive property includes homes in Clydesdale close to Loftus stadium with three to four bedroom homes cost between R1.6 million and R2.8 million,” he said. Read: How land reform is impacting South Africans looking to buy a home