Growing property development company Reeflords Property Development (Pty) Ltd has become a significant player in the South African residential and commercial development market. Since its registration in South Africa in 2011, Reeflords has made it their purpose to identify, invest in, and develop property on ideally-situated, undeveloped land near suburban and retail zones to offer homeowners the opportunity to put down roots and start living. Reeflords offers exclusive properties that come complete with a clubhouse, gym, pool, kiddies pool, children’s play area, 24-hour security, and biometric access – to ensure high-quality living that meets the lifestyle needs and demands of the market. All apartments in property developments offered by Reeflords are also Wi-Fi-ready with the latest fibre optic technology already installed. The latest property developments offered by Reeflords are posted below. Located near Carlswald Lifestyle Shopping Centre, Vodaworld, and the Mall of Africa, residents and tenants are just a stone’s throw from top-class facilities that cater to all your lifestyle needs.  For professionals or families looking for housing options in the upscale suburbs of Boksburg, Royal Reef is the perfect option – as it offers easy access to all major roads, schools, and shopping centres in the area. Luxurious units in the Royal Reef property development come standard with market-leading finishes to add a touch of class to the modern dream home.  This luxury property development is ideally situated near Carlswald, Midrand and offers a family-friendly lifestyle with gorgeous views overlooking a natural wetland. With easy access to the N1 Highway, Mall of Africa, and top schools, Midview Gardens cater to every homeowner’s lifestyle needs.  Located in Randburg on the corner of Beyers Naude and CR Swart Road, Orchid Ridge offers easy access to all major roads and lifestyle centres. Like all the other properties, Orchid Ridge’s apartments are Wi-Fi-ready with the latest fibre optic technology already installed, and property development amenities include a clubhouse, gym, pool, children’s play area, 24-hour security, and biometric access for residents’ and tenants’ peace of mind.  Canvas 82 is conveniently situated in the affluent suburb of Northriding, on Witkoppen Road, and is a huge investment opportunity – as it is centrally located to all major attractions, both current and upcoming, in the Northern suburbs of Johannesburg.  Backed by the diversified Sai Cheng (S&C) international Group, founded in 1996, the company offers an array of diverse skills and experience, coupled with astute business acumen, gained through exposure to both commercial and residential markets in various parts of the world. Reeflords strongly believes Sectional Titles provide their clients with an affordable and sustainable system of property ownership, which will generate an improved return on investment over the long term. “We intend to explore opportunities to grow into the provision of infrastructure in our quest to make full use of our capital base and skill-set across a broader front,” said Reeflords. Contact Reeflords on 011 516 0057, and visit their website and Facebook page to find out about their latest developments. This article was published in partnership with Reeflords.