The New Zealand government recently made changes to its new Global Impact Visa (GIV), which is specifically designed to lure entrepreneurs, investors and tech start-ups. The visa aims to attract those with the “drive and capability to launch global ventures from New Zealand”, who may not be able to qualify for other visa categories. While the visa is only open to 400 ‘individual pioneering entrepreneurs and investors’ every year, the country is also continuously updating its skills and job shortage list. These jobs are typically split into two different categories – the Long Term Skill Shortage List (LTSSL) and the Immediate Skill Shortage List (ISSL). Alternatively, Immigration New Zealand has developed a search tool that allows you to search whether your job currently falls under either of these categories. According to a recent report by Pew Research, New Zealand is only behind the UK, Australia and the USA when it comes to the countries South Africans most want to move to, with an estimated 60,000 migrants already living in the country. Long Term Skill Shortage List (LTSSL) The Long Term Skill Shortage List (LTSSL) identifies occupations where there is a sustained and on-going shortage of highly skilled workers both globally and throughout New Zealand. If you get a job in an occupation on the LTSSL and meet the list requirements, you may be granted a Work to Residence visa under the Long Term Skill Shortage List work visa. This means that you may be eligible to apply for residence in two years, provided you meet standard requirements and that job has a base salary of at least NZ$45,000. Some of these jobs include: The Immediate Skill Shortage List (ISSL) includes occupations where skilled workers are immediately required in New Zealand and indicates that there are no New Zealand citizens or residents available to take up the position. This enables faster processing of the application. If you are offered a job on the ISSL and meet the list requirements you may be granted an Essential Skills work visa. This means that you are permitted to work in New Zealand temporarily. You won’t necessarily be able to apply for residence. Some of these jobs include: Read: New Zealand has a new visa to lure tech skills – here’s how you can apply