Deloitte has released its Human Capital Trends report for 2018, revealing top trends in the workplace. Over 11,000 executives from 124 countries participated in the global survey, including 354 South African business and HR leaders. These professionals offered insights into the future of work and human capital’s valuable role in shaping it. A key focus of the report identified which communication platforms South African employees and businesses were moving towards over the next 3-5 years. Up to 70% of global respondents believe workers will spend more time on collaboration platforms in the future (such as Slack), while 67 % see growth in “work-based social media”, and 62% predict an increase in instant messaging. When looking at the local data however, the overall findings show that most respondents use email and phone for personal and professional communication – probably because they are more familiar with these technologies. Communication channels regularly used for personal/professional communication showed that 94% of respondents say that email is the most commonly used communication channel for professionals, with 78% using email for personal communication. Even though there are many new technologies available, only a small percentage of local respondents said they will consider using social messaging and online collaboration tools in the next three to five years. Click on image to enlarge.  The global findings showed that face-to-face meetings and phone meetings are on the decline, while work collaboration platforms are on the rise. Their overall preference remains face-to-face and telephonic communication. In contrast, South African companies expect face to face meetings to increase, alongside other more traditional forms of communication such as e-mail, texting and phoning.  Deloitte also noted that many local organisations only consider implementing new technologies or software tools once these have been approved by their Information Technology (IT) department. “It is clear that IT and HR are the primary drivers of new communication channels and connected work tools; however, only 14 % of organisations allow employees to use emerging channels,” it said. “This could be because of IT security protocols in place, budgetary constraints, or lack of awareness of the new tools and platforms available,” Deloitte said. In addition, 36% of respondents said that they only permit the use of well-established communication/collaboration tools, while only 14.5% allow employees to use emerging communication channels and tools freely. Read: This is when your boss can fire you for what you say on Facebook and Twitter