Global market research firm, Ipsos, has released the results of its latest Global Advisor survey aimed at exploring the perceptions of socialist ideas in the 21st century. The poll was carried out online among adults aged under 65 in April this year across 28 countries – including the US, UK Australia, Russia and South Africa. Ipsos noted that South Africa produced a national sample that is considered to represent a more affluent, connected population – and as a result was not necessarily wholly representative of the population. However, it stated that this was still a vital social group to understand, representing an important and emerging middle class. According to the survey, half of the people around the world think that at present, socialist ideals are of great value for societal progress. Despite this, half of the people also agree that socialism is a system of political oppression, mass surveillance and state terror. Globally, eight in ten people think that the rich should be taxed more to support the poor. Around the world nine in ten people believe that education should be free of charge and that free healthcare is a human right. Nearly seven in ten people globally believe that every resident should have the right to unconditional basic income. Free Market  Almost seven in ten people globally agree (66%) that free market competition brings out the best in people. People in India (86%) were most likely to agree followed by people from Malaysia (84%), Peru and South Africa (both 83%). In contrast only about half of respondents in Sweden (52%), Belgium (51%), Germany (49%) and France (43%) agree. Despite this, South Africa also ranked highly when asked if they believed that socialist ideals are of great value for societal progress, with 57% of South Africans agreeing with this statement. According to the survey, half of the people globally (50%) agree that at present, socialist ideals are of great value for societal progress. Chinese people are most likely to agree (84%) followed by people from India (72%) and Malaysia (68%). Taxes  Across all 28 countries nearly eight in 10 people (78%) think that the rich should be taxed more to support the poor. Agreement is highest in Spain (87%), Serbia, China (both 86%) and Russia (85%), whereas it is lowest in the USA (67%), Brazil (66%) and South Africa (58%). Interestingly, South Africans were also one of the lowest ranked countries when asked whether they thought talent was an important part of earning capacity. Globally, nearly seven in 10 people think that it is right for those who are talented to earn more than those who are less gifted. However just 61% of South Africans agree with this statement. South Africans were also some of the lowest ranked when asked if education should be free (77%) – compared to a global average of almost 90%.  Read: South Africa has dropped off the map for investors: economist