The number of single-parent families around the world is going up – and for an increasing number of them, it’s by choice. This is according to Danelle van Heerde, head of advice processes at Sanlam Personal Finance, who notes that in South Africa a staggering 38% of children live just with their mothers. She added that in the US, single parent households have more than tripled since 1960 (with single mothers heading up 80% of these), while in the UK 21% of children live in lone parent families. Van Heerde said that the pressures of single parenting make it absolutely critical for single mothers to start saving as soon as possible to help them cope with the financial strain. “Single moms need planning and structure to cope with the demands of working and looking after children. “The same approach applies to their finances. They often have additional expense burdens, compared to dual income families. In addition, costs associated with specialised pregnancies and ongoing expenses like day-care can add to the overall financial pressure. Plus, there are long-term goals like education for which to save.” The advisor broke down the conception and birthing options open to single women and what they cost. IVF & IUI In Vitro Fertilisation (IVF) is an assisted conception technique that combines egg and sperm cells in a laboratory dish and then returns these to the uterus for development. According to Van Heerde, IVF costs approximately R52,000 – R63,000 per cycle. Intrauterine insemination (IUI) – also known as donor insemination or artificial insemination is a relatively simple fertility treatment that transfers semen directly into the uterus. The approximate cost is between R5,000 – R9,000 per cycle. Birth According to van Heerde giving birth at a government hospital is free of charge. However, there are a number of costs to consider when using a birthing centre or private hospital, she said; A natural birth with a 48-hour admission at a birthing centre costs approximately R15,650, excluding paediatrician fees and an epidural. However if you need an emergency caesarean, you’ll be paying R35,240, excluding gynaecologist, anaesthetist and paediatrician fees.
At a private hospital, a three-day stay is about R20,193, assuming a natural birth. A planned caesarean is approximately R25,655 for a four-day stay.
Fees for the gynaecologist, anaesthetist and paediatrician are over and above these costs, and can add R12,000-R20,000 to the bill. Adoption The costs of adoption vary greatly depending on who facilitates the process, said van Heerden. Adoptions through Child Welfare and other Non-Profit Agencies are based on income and typically cost between R12,000 and R15,000 (not including the cost of the medical, police clearance and psychological examination which are usually extras). Adoptions through a private social worker or adoption organisation can however cost significantly more. Read: These diseases and illnesses are costing South African insurers millions