The Financial Times has published its latest Executive Education rankings for 2018, showing which global business schools carry the best courses custom-made for executives. The ranking looks at the best 90 business schools offering customised programmes and the best 80 offering open-enrolment programmes worldwide, and highlights the quality and suitability of the programs and teaching excellence. The custom programmes are courses tailored to the training needs of organisations, while open enrolment programmes are courses on specific topics such as leadership which are offered irrespective of the organisations. The placement is determined through interviews and surveys of clients and organisations that have benefitted from such programmes, as nominated by the schools. Some of the factors the Financial Times looks at are: Partner schools – which looks at the quality and quantity of the programmes developed and delivered in conjunction with other Equis or Association to Advance Collegiate Schools of Business (AACSB), accredited business schools;
Value for money – which rates the programme design, teaching and materials in terms of value for money;
Future use – which looks at the likelihood that clients will reuse GIBS for other customised programmes in future. In the 2018 ranking, five schools available in South Africa made the grade across both the customised and open enrolment rankings. The University of Pretoria’s Gordon Institute of Business Science ranked as the best course in the country, ranking 51st overall on the custom course list (out of 90), and 45th (out of 80) in the open enrolment courses. It was also the only South African-only schools to be ranking in the overall top 50, placing 42nd. The UK’s Henley Business School, which also has operations in South Africa, also ranked highly, placing 22nd overall, and 18th and 46th on the open and custom rankings, respectively. The University of Cape Town’s Graduate School of Business ranked 67th in the customised course ranking, followed by USB Executive Development which ranked 89th. USB Executive also ranked 62nd in the open-enrolment rankings. Global, non-degree executive training group, Duke Corporate Education, which has operations in South Africa based in Johannesburg, was the highest-ranked custom course open to local executives, ranking 2nd on the custom ranking. The table below shows the overall top 50  Read: New subject requirements carry big risks for grade 9s who want to go to university