South Africa is preparing for 5G networks in its efforts to remain competitive and embrace the new era of the Fourth Industrial Revolution. This is according to Telecommunications and Postal Services minister Siyabonga Cwele, who was speaking at a 5G Huddle in Durban on Tuesday (29 May). “The dense and heavy traffic 5G cells will need to be connected to the core network through a backhaul infrastructure, often with extreme requirements in terms of capacity, latency, availability, energy and cost efficiency,” Cwele said. He added that all backhauls will be important, “whether it is microwave or new forms of satellite which will give requisite speeds.” “So we won’t be stuck on technology. We’ll use any technology that can give us the requisite speeds and improve access to all.” “We’ll use any technology that can give us the requisite speeds and improve access for all. As a country, we are prioritising the rapid deployment policy, where we are harmonising and making it easy for the operators to access the site to deploy ICT infrastructure,” Cwele said. However, he noted that the ‘reality of the continent’ has prevented the deployment of fibre infrastructure where there’s low population density. As such, he said government was considering alternate ways to reach these areas. Sentech, for example, is exploring partnerships to rollout modern satellite technologies to expedite coverage – especially in rural areas. 5G Citing the recent 5G trials conducted successfully during the Pyong Chang Olympics, Cwele said that 5G will build on the ongoing evolution of 4G technology and will deliver significant technological improvements by enhancing mobile broadband, the Internet of Things (IoT) and ‘mission critical services’. He added that 5G will create an ecosystem for technical and business innovation involving vertical markets such as automotive, energy, food and agriculture, city management, government, healthcare, manufacturing, public transportation and many more. “For 5G to be a success, innovative spectrum and infrastructure sharing models are essential, particularly given the level of investment required for network densification,” he said. “Spectrum within three key frequency ranges (sub-1 GHz, 1-6 GHz and above 6 GHz) will be required to deliver widespread coverage and capacity that will be able to support all 5G use cases. “Last year we consulted widely on the implementation of spectrum policy and we have found a consensus where we have said in view of the large investment made by the industry over the years, we must assess what would be the requirement of the Wireless Open Access Network (WOAN) in terms of spectrum. “We then commissioned CSIR to conduct a study on the actual need of a sustainable WOAN. The outcome of the study is in the Cabinet process for consideration and approval and will be published after the conclusion of the Cabinet process,” he said. He added that his department and the SADC region are leading the WRC 19 preparatory work, to consider identification of frequency bands for the future development of International Mobile Telecommunications (IMT), including possible additional allocations to the mobile service on a primary basis. “All these measures are meant to ensure investor certainty and facilitate further infrastructure investment and inclusive growth in the ICT sector,” he said. Read: Comsol, Verizon and Samsung to launch 5G trials in South Africa