Keeping up with the rapidly changing world of technology can sometimes be quite a mission. Every day developers are creating new and innovative apps that make life more fun and convenient. The Betway app is no different, and provides users the ultimate experience in online sports betting. Betway is a leading, global sports betting company that offers a wide selection of events for all sports enthusiasts. This advanced gaming spot is available on desktop and mobile and is designed to adapt to any smartphone’s screen. The crisp, clear graphics create a realistic appearance and the lag-free navigation allows for easy click-and-play convenience. The Betway mobile app is easy to use and equipped with all the features you’d need for a smooth, hassle-free betting experience. Here you’re treated to all the latest and updated news and sports events happening locally and internationally. Whether you’re into Premier League football, Cricket, Rugby or any winter/summer Olympics, Betway is the top spot with all the latest fixtures. You can even bet on your favourite soccer team in this year’s Fifa World Cup, from the comfort of your home. It used to be that one needed to find a bookie or go to a specific betting shop to enjoy the gaming action. With the Betway app you’re able to bet and win anywhere, anytime. All you need to do is log in, select your favourite sports event and make your bet via your handset with any of the secure banking options. What sets the Betway app apart is the fact that you can bet in any currency, even South African Rands. You can also choose any quick-pay option like i-Pay or Mpesa if you prefer not to use a bank account. The high-tech security encryption ensures your personal information is protected and all bets are verified via SMS to your personal number. Staying on top of your game is easy with Betway’s realtime live ticker. Now you don’t have to miss any scores or updates and your personal betting slip allows you to keep track of open bets. The app is also equipped to provide instant customer assistance with the Live Chat feature. Whenever, wherever, Betway gives you hours of rewarding fun and endless chances to win big cash prizes. Join now and get in on the sports betting action with this savvy mobile application. This article was published in partnership with Betway.