Founder and chairman of PSG Group, Jannie Mouton has revealed that he has been diagnosed with early stage dementia. Mouton, known as the “Boere Buffett” for his successes on the stock market, founded PSG Group in 1995 and has seen it grow into one of the country’s biggest business success stories. PSG is an investment holding company with investments in a wide variety of sectors, including financial services, banking, private equity, agriculture and education. The group has a 30.7% stake in the hugely successful Capitec Bank, with a majority shareholding in private education group, Curro (56.4%) – two companies which have recorded outstanding performances over the past few years. In a voluntary statement issued to PSG shareholders on Wednesday, Mouton said that he has recently been diagnosed with an early form of dementia. “The implication of this is that my short-term memory does not always function as it should, the result being that I sometimes forget people’s names, repeat myself, or may appear somewhat disorientated. This does not happen every day, but I cannot ignore it,” he said. Despite these struggles, Mouton said that he will be staying on as non-executive chairman of the group, and had a specialised team of advisors that support him, and communicate directly with the lead independent director on the PSG Group board, “for the right decisions to be made at the right time”. “I still come into the office every day – I enjoy seeing how the people at PSG endeavour daily to make a difference by working hard and smart. I regularly share the lessons learnt over the years with our team and can see how the PSG DNA of thinking and doing has taken root throughout the group. “After consultation with my senior colleagues, we feel that I still have a contribution to make as PSG Group’s non-executive chairman, given that PSG Group’s executive management team is very strong with the necessary depth, experience and knowledge,” he said. You can read the full statement below: Read: Meet the ‘Boere Buffett’: South Africa’s newest dollar billionaire