Hijacking remains an unfortunate everyday concern for many South African motorists, with Statistics South Africa’s latest Victims of Crime Survey showing a total of 30,664 South Africans were victims of vehicle hijacking in 2016/2017. This equates to around 85 hijackings per day – or four every hour – meaning there is a high chance you or someone you know is likely to be affected by the crime. “Hijackers are pouncing on unsuspecting vehicle owners wherever the opportunity presents itself,” said Warwick Scott-Rodger, executive head of Dialdirect. “Theirs is a multi-million-rand industry where anything from a meticulously planned hijacking, to more opportunistic hits, are just another day at the office. South African vehicle owners have to take this very seriously and be thoroughly prepared.” “None of us can afford to think that ‘It won’t happen to me’. We have to be vigilant and thoroughly prepared for the worst,” the Dialdirect head said. According to Dialdirect’s statistics, the top five vehicle hijacking trends in South Africa right now are: 1. Vehicles hijacked at fuel stations Drivers of vehicles are approached by assailants at fuel stations while filling up with fuel. They approach the driver from his or her blind-spot and force the driver out of the vehicle. 2. Stranger danger Vehicle owners are approached at social spots by strangers who try to befriend them and later spike their drinks, take their keys and make off with their vehicle. 3. Blue light robberies Vehicle owners are pulled over by imposters posing as traffic or police officials – often in unmarked vehicles. Once they pull over, they are overpowered and their vehicles taken. 4. Vehicles taken in house robberies Vehicle owners are overpowered in their homes and vehicles are taken along with other possessions. 5. Vehicles hijacked after driver is followed home Assailants follow vehicles home, after which owners are boxed in and hijacked in their driveway. Assailants often wait for the owner to enter the property and then block the security gate from closing behind them. Read:  How much it costs Cape Town to set up CCTV – and how successful they are at stopping crime