Oracle has expanded the scope of autonomous capabilities with built-in AI and machine learning in its application development, integration, and analytics services. The group on Monday (7 May) announced the availability of Oracle Autonomous Analytics Cloud, Oracle Autonomous Integration Cloud, and Oracle Autonomous Visual Builder Cloud. With built-in advanced artificial intelligence (AI) and machine learning algorithms, these new PaaS services automate and eliminate key tasks to enable companies to lower cost, reduce risk, accelerate innovation, and get predictive insights, it said. Earlier this year, Oracle made available the world’s first Autonomous Database for data warehouse workloads. The company said it is committed to adding self-driving, self-securing, and self-repairing capabilities to all of its PaaS services coupled with specific autonomous capabilities for each functional area. The company plans to release additional autonomous services later in the year focused on mobile and chatbots, data integration, Blockchain, security and management, and additional database workloads, including OLTP. “Embedding AI and machine learning in these cloud services will help organizations innovate in revolutionary new ways,” said Amit Zavery, executive vice president of development, Oracle Cloud Platform. “These new cloud services are the latest in a series of steps from Oracle to incorporate industry-first autonomous capabilities that will enable customers to significantly reduce operational costs, increase productivity, and decrease risk.” Oracle Autonomous Analytics Cloud combines machine learning, adaptive intelligence, and service automation to create an analytics platform that breaks down barriers between people, places, data, and systems, fundamentally changing the way people analyze, understand, and act on information.
Oracle Autonomous Integration Cloud accelerates digital transformation by enabling business processes spanning multiple Oracle and non-Oracle SaaS and on-premises applications through a combination of machine learning, embedded best-practice guidance, and pre-built application integration and process automation.
Oracle Autonomous Visual Builder Cloud helps to accelerate mobile and web application development and deployment by enabling business users and developers to build these applications with no coding. Learn more here. Oracle said that its cloud platform services all share the following autonomous capabilities Self-Driving to Lower Costs and Increase Productivity: Eliminate human labor to provision, secure, monitor, backup, recover and troubleshoot. Automatically upgrade and patch itself while running. Instantly grow and shrink compute or storage without downtime.
Self-Securing to Lower Risk: Protect from external attacks and malicious internal users. Automatically apply security updates while running to protect against cyberattacks, and automatically encrypt all data.
Self-Repairing for Higher Availability: Provide automated protection from all planned and unplanned downtime with up to 99.995% availability, resulting in less than 2.5 minutes of downtime per month including planned maintenance. Read: Oracle shares drop after cloud sales miss analysts’ estimates