By Kevin Warren – Chief Commercial Officer at Xerox. Customers want digital services suppliers that will be with them for the long haul, that are dynamic and able to provide high-quality products, and unparalleled service and support — worldwide when necessary. We knew this when we invented the managed print services market back when talk about “the cloud” was limited to meteorology. These days, when cloud enablement is table stakes, our document services are no longer limited to printing — nor available only to large enterprises. Even small and medium sized businesses must navigate the “less-paper” office, reach sustainability goals, gain greater visibility and control of document processes and costs, and improve security with the latest authentication, encryption and virus protection technology. Whether you’re talking about managed print services, document imaging, security, workflow or mobility, Xerox is a partner who will be with you for the long haul. We will help your company navigate our world’s relentlessly-changing technology. I’m favorably biased, of course, but you don’t have to take my word for it. Independent analysts study the document services market. They note the market’s needs and examine the vendors. For your consideration, I share this roundup of analyst reports on our managed print and document services from the past few years. Keypoint Intelligence (Buyers Lab) has awarded Xerox with a prestigious BLI PaceSetter award in the Document Imaging Security category thanks to its strong device-certification program to ensure compliance with rigorous industry security standards, excellent hard drive security and job-protection features, device integrity and intrusion-detection features (powered by McAfee), and top-tier device management security features.  (Source: BLI PaceSetter 2017- 2018: Document Imaging Security.) Read the Keypoint Intelligence BLI PaceSetter 2017-2018 Document Imaging Security. Interested in seeing the certificate as well? Click here. Keypoint Intelligence (Buyers Lab) recognized Xerox as the only vendor to score in the top tier for all four categories in its study: platform technology, developer support, market approach and app portfolio. The report cites our “unique go-to-market strategic approach, productizing the platform for dealers, customers and ISVs as a truly customizable, beneficial tool for all.” (Source: BLI PaceSetter 2017- 2018: MFP Platforms & App Ecosystems.) Click to see the certificate and view the award article. Keypoint Intelligence (Buyers Lab) noted our wide range of mobile print offerings, from free apps to robust, scalable solutions. Jamie Bsales, Director of Solutions Analysis for Keypoint Intelligence, noted our “… approach to mobile print is perfectly suited to the real world. The solutions are easily integrated and can be employed as simply as sending an email to a colleague.” (Source: BLI PaceSetter 2017- 2018: Mobile Print.) To learn more view the award article and certificate. Four printers and multifunction printers from our VersaLink and WorkCentre families sweep the Keypoint Intelligence (Buyers Lab) Summer Pick Awards. The report notes: “Xerox has a strong document workflow portfolio, including proprietary assessment and collaboration tools. It has developed core assets that address a broad range of horizontal business applications and verticals to address key markets strategic to its growth.” (Source: “IDC MarketScape: Worldwide Document Workflow Services Hardcopy 2016 Vendor Assessments,” September 2016, IDC #US40994416, by Robert Palmer, Holly Muscolino and Terry Frazier.) Read the IDC MarketScape for DWS – Xerox Excerpt In the first ever IDC MarketScape Worldwide Security Solutions and Services Hardcopy 2017 Vendor Assessment, Xerox was named a Leader. One of our main listed strengths in the assessment were our ConnectKey enabled devices, that were identified as among the best in class for addressing endpoint security risks and providing protection from internal and external cyber threats. (Source: “IDC MarketScape: Worldwide Security Solutions and Services Hardcopy 2017 Vendor Assessment,” October 2017, IDC #US41988517, by Robert Palmer and Allison Correia.) Read the IDC MarketScape for WW Security Solutions and Services – Xerox Excerpt. Listing Xerox as a leader, Keypoint Intelligence-InfoTrends highlighted our established MPS program with a diverse customer base, our services centered approach, and our partnership with Hyland Software and Datawatch, which helped us differentiate our MPS offering. (Source: “Managed IT Infrastructure: Managed Print Services Analysis,” by Brendan Morse, InfoTrends, March, 2015. In a Porter’s generic strategies analysis, companies are placed in accordance with how they seek competitive advantage in the market.) Read the InfoTrends Managed IT Infrastructure Managed Print Services Amongst traditional MPS vendors for workflow automation, Xerox was positioned first in brand perception in a Digitisation Study conducted by Quocirca. Our commitment to enhancing our MPS offerings to tackle digital transformations of large and complex organizations has earned us the top spot. (Source: Quocirca, “Digital transformation: Bridging the paper and digital gap,” April 2016, by Louella Fernandes.) Xerox was named as a leader in the Quocirca Managed Print Services Landscape for the 8th year in a row. We have maintained our leadership in Quocirca’s evaluation of the MPS market due to our “global scale, comprehensive office and production MPS portfolio and a long track record of excelling in global delivery, multivendor support, analytics and reporting,” according to Louella Fernandes, research director at Quocirca. (Source: “Managed Print Services Landscape”, 2017 by Louella Fernandes, Quocirca, July 2017.) Read the Quocirca “Managed Print Services Landscape, 2017” Summary Report. Xerox retained leadership in Quocirca’s fourth consecutive report on channel managed print services. “Xerox has one of the most advanced and mature channel partner ecosystems in the industry,” said Louella Fernandes, associate director, Quocirca. “What particularly sets Xerox apart is its business development program, which offers extensive marketing, sales, training, operational support and resources for channel partners.” (Source: “Channels to Managed Print Services”, 2018 by Louella Fernandes, Quocirca, April 2018) Read the Quocirca Channels to Managed Print Services – Xerox Excerpt Report. Bytes Document Solutions (BDS) is Africa’s leading document management technology and services company and the largest Xerox distributor in the world. It is the authorised Xerox distributor in 26 sub-Saharan countries offering the complete range of Xerox document equipment, software solutions and services. BDS forms part of JSE listed Allied Electronics Corporation (Altron).       http://bytesdocumentsolutions.co.za This article was published in partnership with Bytes Document Solutions.