The Consumer Goods and Services Ombudsman (CGSO) recently released its report for the first quarter of 2018. While the majority of the report focused on complaints received and addressed by the regulator in the first three months of the year, it also included an important case it dealt with, highlighting consumer rights with regards to electronic devices in South Africa, and buying online. The case dealt with a complainant who purchased a laptop from the supplier online. The complainant paid for the laptop – however, it failed to turn on after delivery. The complainant immediately returned the laptop, but the supplier refused to refund or replace the laptop, and instead insisted that the complainant keep the laptop or pay a 20% handling fee. The supplier then tested the laptop at their office, where the laptop started up briefly and immediately shut down again. According to the supplier they only had to reset the BIOS and it further explained that their warranty only covers hardware defects and not software related issues. The laptop restarted after the BIOS reset and is working with no fault. The supplier therefore argued that the laptop is not faulty and required the complainant to take the laptop back or pay a restocking fee. The complainant believed that the laptop was defective and insisted on a refund, the supplier on the other hand advised that the problem with the laptop does not amount to a defect in terms of the CPA and did not require any repairs only a software update. Defect The CGSO decided to obtain the opinion of an independent inspector to determine if the laptop had a material defect as defined by section 53 of the Consumer Protection Act. Section 53 of the CPA defines a defect as follows: The independent inspector was not able to conclusively prove whether the complainant used the correct start up procedure or if the laptop was in fact defective. Cooling-off With regards to the charging of a handling fee, Section 44 of the Electronic Communications and Transactions Act provides for a 7-day cooling off period on all online transactions -no matter the reason. It reads: “This section further provides that the complainant is only liable for the direct cost of returning the goods. The complainant did return the goods at his own cost and we therefore recommended that the supplier refund the complainant in full,” said the CGSO. The supplier accepted the recommendation and refunded the complainant in full. Read: Flipkart said to approve $15 billion Walmart deal