Capitec Bank has added insurance to its expanding range of financial services products, with the launch of Capitec Insure and a unique funeral product. The Capitec Funeral Plan, underwritten by Centriq Life Insurance Company, “is set to be the most affordable and flexible insurance product of its kind in South Africa”, the group said in a statement on Monday (21 May). Featuring paperless applications, claims paid out within four hours, and cover for up to 22 lives on one policy, the funeral products range from R10,000 to R100,000. “We designed the funeral plan to be the most affordable, easiest to use and straightforward product on the market and based it on the same principles that our business was founded on 17 years ago – simplicity, transparency and affordability,” said Gerrie Fourie, CEO of Capitec Bank. “By introducing an insurance offering, we are delivering on our diversification strategy to grow our service offering and bring more value to our clients.” No paperwork needed The Capitec Funeral Plan allows clients to personalise cover to their individual needs and manage policies using the Capitec Bank app. Existing Capitec clients can activate the funeral plan in a branch or ​on their banking app with no paperwork required. Policies start from R25 per month through the Capitec app and R40 per month when applying in branch. All policies feature no automatic annual premium increases provided the cover stays the same,” the bank said. Part of Capitec’s Global One solution, the Capitec Funeral Plan features cover for up to 21 dependants in addition to the policyholder. Other benefits: Newborn Premium Waiver: Full cover for 6 months without any monthly premium payments as soon as the policyholder or life assured’s spouse (also a life assured) gives birth or adopts a child.
Double Accidental Death benefit: From day one, the funeral payout is doubled if a life assured dies in an accident.
Death Premium Waiver: Should the policyholder pass away, the remaining life assureds covered at the time of death will continue to receive full cover for a further six months without any monthly premium payments.
Voluntary Policy Pause: A policy can also be paused for up to 6 months without any monthly premiums and with no cover. Once restarted, the cover and premiums are reactivated with the same full benefits. Read: Capitec CEO Gerrie Fourie scores a massive R57 million payday