Analytics group Lightstone recently released a report detailing the value of the type of second-hand car you can afford based on your monthly salary in South Africa in 2018. The report is based on current South African vehicle prices and salaries (May 2018), and assumes that people are not going to spend more than 20% of their gross monthly income on financing a car. The calculations also assume that the vehicles are financed over five years at an interest rate of prime +2%. According to TransUnion’s latest Vehicle Pricing Index, the make-up of used vehicle sales has shown that 46% are under two years old and 9% were demo models which indicates consumers are opting for cars that are less than two years old. The percentage of cars (new and used) being financed below R200,000 has remained consistent to last quarters numbers with 43% in Q1. “This has shown a marginal increase in used car loans which has being consistent at around R242,000. This indicates a shifting emphasis on the value proposition that consumers place on their vehicles, as they look for the maximum amount of value from a car,” TransUnion said. When it comes to the types of cars, unsurprisingly, Toyota and VW dominate both the new and used space, capturing more than 35% of the new and used passenger financed volumes, through vehicles including the Polo and Vivo range, the Fortuner and Corolla models. Using this R242,000 amount, Lightstone estimates that you would need to earn between R26,000-R30,000 to pay for the average second-hand car purchase in South Africa. Pricing is based on: Assumption that people are not going to spend more than 20% of their gross monthly income on financing a car and not more than 30% on servicing a home loan.
Assumption of a 0% deposit for both home and car financing (but excluding additional fees incurred during the inception of the loan  into the calculation.).
Assumption that the cars are financed over 5 years at an interest rate of prime + 2%.  Lamborghini Huracan  Mercedes AMG  Range Rover Sport  BMW Active Hybrid 7  Toyota Landcruiser Prado  Audi A5 Coupe  Chevrolet Trailblazer  Audi S1 Sportback  Ford Fusion  Volkswagen Amarok  Peugeot 208 Active  Suzuki Swift  Read: These are the homes you can afford to buy with your salary in South Africa