Jobs portal CareerJunction has published its latest index, showing which job skills are most in-demand right now, and which sectors are hiring. According to the group, the April index settled at 96 index points, indicating a decrease in jobs (5%) and therefore increased competition for jobs. Software development remains at the top of recruiters’ most wanted list, along with middle/department managers and financial/project accountants. So far, 2018 has seen a steady decrease in sales and admin, office & support vacancies, it said. Since January, demand in these sectors is down by more than 20%. The manufacturing & assembly, building & construction and finance sectors, on the other hand, saw an uptake in jobs since January. Trending jobs for April include financial analysis, account management and cost & management accounting. Financial Analysis Average salary offerings for intermediate level positions: GP: R39,162 to R48,900 p.m. (CTC)
WC: R32,667 to R44,708 p.m. (CTC)
KZN: Not enough information available. Account Management Average salary offerings for intermediate level positions: GP: R20,833 to R23,929 p.m. (CTC)
WC: R15,125 to R20,500 p.m. (CTC)
KZN: Not enough information available. Cost & Management Accounting Average salary offerings for intermediate level positions: GP: R43,352 to R54,746 p.m. (CTC)
WC: R33,453 to R39,061 p.m. (CTC)
KZN: R37,000 to R39,132 p.m. (CTC) As with previous months, the most in-demand skills in the country are in software development, middle management and financial and project accounting. Software development in particular has remained at the top of recruiters’ most wanted skills list, with over 22% of vacancies on the site being IT-related, with specific allocations for software developers. Department managers are also in high demand, the portal said, with a particularly high demand for finance managers which make up 38% of all managerial position requests. Although a more competitive field, financial and project management skills are still in high-demand, increasing over 20% year-on-year. Job sector supply and demand According to CareerJunction, the IT, business & management and finance sectors are undoubtedly the most sought after sectors, followed by the sales, admin, office & support and architecture & engineering sectors, among others listed. “When looking at active job seekers across various sectors, areas of high supply correlate closely to areas of high demand, however supply outstrips demand in some areas, leading to a competitive environment for job seekers. The opposite is seen for some industries,” it said.  Growing demand is evident in the manufacturing & assembly, building & construction and finance sectors since January. Hiring activity increased by 10%, 5% and 4% respectively. Despite the significantly high demand for professionals within the business & management sector, job volumes remain steady. So far, 2018 has seen a steady decrease in sales and admin, office & support vacancies. Since January, demand in these sectors is down by more than 20%. The architecture & engineering sector also experienced a recent decrease in demand and jobs remain significantly lower year-on-year. Despite the overall high demand for IT professionals, March and April saw a decrease in jobs. The IT sector is experiencing volatile demand trends. This also rings true for the marketing and medical & health sectors. Vacancy volumes remain lower than the same period last year. Read: SA unemployment rate unchanged at 26.7%