The South African Civil Aviation Authority (SACAA) has suspended SA Express’ Air Operator’s Certificate (AoC) as well as the airline’s Aircraft Maintenance Organisation (AMO) approvals. In addition, the SACAA has also suspended the Certificates of Airworthiness of nine of the 21 aircraft being operated by the airline. “This effectively means that as of today (Thursday, 24 May 2018, SA Express) can no longer continue to operate as an airline,” the SACAA said in a statement. To be able to operate, SA Express will have to reapply and be issued with relevant approvals, an air operating certificate, and an approval for the aircraft maintenance organisation, and certificates of airworthiness for the grounded aircraft. The decision to revoke the airline’s permits comes after the SACAA conducted an audit at the airline and its maintenance organisation in the past several days, which uncovered severe cases of non-compliance that pose serious safety risks. While the SACAA does not make the details of its audit findings public, it can, however, be revealed that there were 17 findings, of which five are categorised as Level 1 findings in civil aviation terms. A Level 1 category finding can be described as a “severe non-compliance or non-conformance that poses a very serious safety or security risk to the public and will necessitate the immediate exercising of the discretionary enforcement powers vested in the authorised persons, in the interests of safeguarding aviation safety or security”. The airline could not ensure that operational requirements, and most importantly, safety obligations are met at all times, the SACAA said. Therefore, the grounding of SA Express operations was
inevitable, because in simpler terms the safety management system of the airline was found to be deficient. “As the custodian of aviation safety and security in the country, the SACAA cannot turn a blind eye to any operation where there is overwhelming evidence that safety measures are compromised, because that automatically poses serious danger for the crew, passengers, and the public at large,” said Poppy Khoza, who leads the SACAA as director of Civil Aviation. SA Express said in a statement: Read: SAA, SA Express and Mango to be merged