Cell C says it has entered into a ‘far-reaching’ roaming agreement with rival operator, MTN. “Cell C completed a comprehensive assessment of the wholesale offerings available in the market and based on MTN’s significant network investment in recent times, we concluded that MTN offered the best solution for our business going forward,” Cell C CEO Jose Dos Santos. The agreement will see MTN providing both 3G and 4G services to Cell C in areas where Cell C has chosen to purchase coverage rather than self-build, mainly outside of the main metro areas. “This deal will complement Cell C’s network offering and, with the introduction of roaming 4G services, our customers in those areas will benefit significantly,” said Dos Santos. “The roaming agreement with MTN best meets our needs as a company and we are expecting to complete the implementation in the next few months,” said Dos Santos. Cell C stressed that where a customer is on a call that happens to switch from a Cell C tower to a MTN tower, the call will not be dropped. “Following our in-depth analysis, we know this roaming agreement will bring exceptional value to all parties, particularly to our customers,” said Dos Santos. Cell C said its network service offering is at 99% 2G population coverage, 96% 3G population coverage and with the implementation of this deal 4G population coverage will increase from 33% to 80%. “We look forward to the working with MTN on the implementation of this agreement,” the chief executive said. MTN said that implementation of the agreement will begin next month and the bulk of the services will be transferred within two months. MTN said recently that it invested R11.47 billion into its local network in 2017, while Cell said it invested R1.2 billion. “We set out to create South Africa’s best network so that we could offer our customers the best experience. Our superior network has been created through our consistent network investments and we are pleased that we can now also offer that BOZZA experience to Cell C customers, in areas where we have additional capacity,” said Godfrey Motsa MTN SA CEO. Read: SA mobile share in 2018: Vodacom vs MTN vs Cell C vs Telkom