When it comes to UK visas, there’s one that remains universally popular, according to John Dunn, immigration specialist at Sable International. Dunn notes that despite a number of new visas being introduced over the last few years, the UK ancestry visa is often thought to be the best visa for people looking to live and work in the UK. This is due to the relatively easy to satisfy eligibility requirements, and the fact that it lets you bring your partner with you to the UK, he said. “An ancestral visa allows you to live and work in the UK for five years. Many people around the world are eligible for a UK ancestry visa, yet may not be aware of how easily they can apply for one.” Dun said that you may apply for this visa if you: Have a grandparent who was born in the UK (including the Channel Islands, the Isle of Man or the Republic of Ireland);
Are a Commonwealth citizen;
Are 17 years or older;
Are planning to seek work in the UK;
Are applying from outside of the UK;
Are able to support and house yourself and any dependants without relying on public funds. “This visa is incredibly popular with South Africans, Aussies and Kiwis with familial ties to the UK, as all of these countries are a part of the Commonwealth,” he said. Living and working in the UK (almost) without restriction Dunn said that one of the key benefits of the UK Ancestry visa is that you are allowed to work in whatever field you wish without restriction. “This is a major perk for anyone looking to advance or start their career in the UK. You can change jobs without approval from the home office and your employers don’t need to worry about your visa status,” he said. He added that the visa allows you to exit and re-enter the UK multiple times without putting your visa status at risk, which is important should you need to travel for work. “The ancestry visa allows you to stay in the UK for five years, and after that five-year period you could be eligible for indefinite leave to remain (ILR). ILR will be granted if you have lived in the UK continuously for five years on your Ancestry visa and haven’t spent more than 180 days outside of the country during this time,” he said. According to Dunn another major advantage of the Ancestry visa, is that can also apply to bring your family members and/or partner with you, and they will also enjoy the same rights as you do on your visa as dependants. Financial requirements “When applying for an ancestry visa, you need to have around £1,200 to £1,600 in your account 90 days prior to your date of application, Dunn said. He adds that you will also need to provide three months’ worth of bank statements to prove that you have these funds available to you. “This financial requirement is to prove to the home office that you are capable of sustaining yourself and any dependants in the UK without attempting to make use of public funds,” he said. “The earliest you can apply for your UK ancestry visa is three months before you wish to travel to the UK. “Depending on how your application is presented and whether you have provided all the relevant documentation, you should receive a decision on your visa within three weeks when you apply from outside the UK.” Read: South Africans can visit these 102 countries visa-free right now