Jobs website CareerJunction recently released a list of the highest paying jobs in South Africa. According to the report, engineers remain some of the highest earners in the country, with environmental engineers taking home an average monthly salary of around R75,941 (R911,292 per year). Senior managers across a variety of sectors also earn well, with senior financial managers taking home an average salary of R67,653 a month (R811,836 a year), and senior IT managers taking home an average salary of R68,281 (R819,372 a year). Aside from engineers, other top-paying positions are commonly found in finance and ICT sectors, as well as within the medical field. Below BusinessTech looked at these jobs, and what you will need to study to start working in the field. Lawyers, doctors and airline pilots Notably, CareerJunction’s list omits high paying professions such as lawyers – with that data available in more detailed reports based on firm sizes and types. While students were previously able to study a four year LLB, this has reverted back to the requirements of completing a Bachelor of Arts, Bcom or other undergraduate degrees. On successful completion of the degree, students who wish to further their knowledge of law may apply for the 2-year LLB programme. According to a recent report by GRM search, attorneys working at a large firm can expect to earn anywhere between R350,000 and R1 million in the first two years post-articles. Overall, salaries tend to remain constant until around the 10-year mark, after which they see significant increases due to seniority. Doctors are also not represented in the report – and are regarded as a high paying profession – with seven years often stated as the minimum amount of timing spent training – and salaries also varying greatly on the field. According to data published by the Public Servants Collective Bargaining Council (PSCBC) in July, medical specialists can expect to earn as much as R1.7 million a year. Becoming a commercial pilot is also a relatively long process, with you required to first complete a private pilot licence (PPL) before getting a commercial pilot’s licence (CPL) combined with an Instrument Rating. Following hours of flight time, you then go on to get an Airline Transport Pilot Licence (ATP). According to Payscale, you can earn up to R1.9 million as a commercial pilot in South Africa. Read: Teachers ditch South Africa for bigger salaries abroad