Seedstars World, a seed-stage startup competition for emerging markets and fast-growing startup scenes, has brought its pre-selection rounds to an end. Seedstars connects stakeholders, builds companies from scratch with public and private partners and invests in high-growth startups within these ecosystems. The 10 best startups chosen will now pitch at an event on October 19th – the first leg to choose the country’s best startup. Besides representing South Africa at the Seedstars Regional Summit, the winner of the local finals will win an all-inclusive trip to Switzerland, to compete for the title of Seedstars Global Winner and up to $1 million in equity investments. South Africa was previously represented by EMG Technologies, a mobile and web-based medicines and treatment platform for medical professionals. The top 10 startups to advance to the finals are: DealZapp: a location-based self-service special offers’ platform that will entice customers into your shop and give customers the closest and best deals.
GreenFingers Mobile: enables access to market and finance for small farmers through a digital platform replacing traditional pen and paper management systems.
JOBJACK: an online marketplace for entry-level jobs – disrupting the status quo.
Jumpin Rides: an urban mobility platform providing a commuting service to make easier, cheaper and safer transport in South Africa.
Kuba: partners with small business owners to bring them digital tools that help them access new markets as well as streamline their operation.
Slide Financial: offers white-label digital wallets and easy-to-use payment APIs used by businesses to create sharing-economy or investment app.
HouseME: connects tenants to residential landlords, providing letting services for a fraction of agency fees. The Airbnb for long-term lets.
Digs Connect: Africa’s largest student accommodation marketplace. Find a room close to your campus.
Tutor Roots: A reliable, secure and convenient way to get an approved tutor for 1-on-1 lessons in the comfort of your own home.
Vibescout: the easiest way to discover things to do near you. The event is powered by PayFast and further support is provided by HYBR the local ambassador. Read: Cape Town based buy-to-lease solar startup gets cash injection