BMW has unveiled its new X7 SUV which is set to launch worldwide in March 2019. BMW said that the X7 will combine the presence and spaciousness of a luxury car with the versatile, agile driving properties of a Sports Activity Vehicle (SAV). Powering the new X7 is either a single-turbo 3.0-litre inline-6 in the xDrive40i or a twin-turbo 4.4-litre V8 in the xDrive50i. The six-cylinder produces 335 horsepower and 330 pound-feet of torque, while the V8 produces 456 horsepower and 479 pound-feet of torque. The X7 will be the largest BMW X model at 5,151 millimetres in length, 2,000 millimetres wide, 1,805 millimetres tall, and with a wheelbase of 3,105 millimetres. The car’s defining features, when viewed from the side, are its large windows, high ground clearance and long roofline.    Internal features include four-zone automatic climate control, ambient lighting and three-section panoramic glass roof as standard. Five-zone automatic climate control, a panorama glass roof sky lounge, controls with glass applications, Bowers & Wilkins Diamond Surround Sound System and rear-seat entertainment are all available as optional extras. It comes with seven seats as standard, and the middle-row can be specified with two individual comfort seats as an option. The seats come complete with armrests, cupholders and USB ports – and all are electrically adjustable. The BMW Live Cockpit Professional system is fitted as standard and comprises a fully digital instrument cluster and a control display, each of which has a screen diagonal of 12,3 inches. The BMW Intelligent Personal Assistant included in the operating system from March 2019 – or available to import by Remote Software Upgrade – presents the latest advances in the field of digital connectivity. Once activated with the spoken prompt “Hey BMW”, the digital companion helps the driver to utilise the car’s functions. The system will continue to acquire new capabilities all the time thanks to updates transmitted via a remote software upgrade.     Read: A look at the first-ever Rolls-Royce SUV – named after a South African diamond