Brother has done it again. Continuing its dominance of PCMag’s annual awards in the United States, Brother International Corporation has been recognised with its 10th consecutive Readers’ Choice Award for best printers and sixth consecutive Business Choice Award as the best office printer manufacturer. The PCMag Readers’ Choice Awards are based on overall customer satisfaction and printer attributes including setup, reliability, printing quality, technical support, repairs and the cost of consumables. “According to our survey respondents, no one else can deliver the same level of overall satisfaction, reliability, and ease of setup,” said Dan Costa, Editor-in-Chief of PCMag. “Respondents tell us Brother printers continue to deliver excellent printed output and no one can beat them when it comes to satisfaction with cost of inks and toners.” In the Readers’ Choice survey, Brother had the highest satisfaction among printers less than a year old, printers for home, inkjet all-in-one printers, laser printers, and laser all-in-ones. “Brother is in a class by itself when it comes to printers recommended for the office,” said Costa. “Year in and year out, the company has walked away with the highest award we can give in printers, and this year is no exception.” For the PCMag Business Choice Awards, respondents were asked to rate their work printer using multiple questions about their overall satisfaction with the solution, as well as experiences with technical support within the past 12 months. “This consistent recognition from the readers of PCMag speaks to our commitment to meet the needs and expectations of our customers, from home office users to business workgroups,” said Dale de Villiers, Marketing Manager at Brother South Africa. “Brother takes pride in its At Your Side customer-centric philosophy and will continue to develop and deliver high-quality products, services and solutions for all aspects of document imaging technology for individual and business users.” The PCMag Readers’ Choice and Business Choice winners are determined by an email survey of PCMag community members that subscribe to the respective mailing lists. This year’s surveys were conducted between June 4, 2018 and June 25, 2018. For more than 35 years, PCMag has been the leading authority on technology buying, delivering independent reviews of more than 2,500 products per year in the United States. PC Labs, our 5,000-square-foot testing facility in New York City, is where our experienced staff develops and performs accurate and reproducible testing that helps us identify the best (and worst) products so our readers can make the smartest buying decisions. The PCMag Editors’ Choice award, our highest endorsement, is recognized globally as a trusted symbol for buyers and sellers of technology products and services. Brother is a leader in the development and manufacturing of technologies in the printing, scanning, labelling, sewing and crafting industries for home, SME and Corporate markets. A trusted brand worldwide that believes in the “Customer First” approach in all aspect of our business, Brother has continuously met the varied needs of our customers through our comprehensive range of technology solutions. Brother International South Africa (Pty) Ltd is the regional sales office for South Africa and markets a range of products manufactured by its parent company, Brother Industries, Ltd. of Nagoya, Japan.  Established in 1970, Brother International South Africa (Pty) Ltd manages an extensive network of distributors in both domestic and Sub Saharan markets. Brother’s printing business is committed to the advancement of technologies and “work style innovation” and constantly strives to pioneer new technologies and improve product quality. The different types of technology Brother offers are convenient to use and helps streamline workflow and efficiency in corporate, SME and home environments. For more information about Brother, visit http://www.brother.co.za. About Brother Earth Brother always takes responsibility, acts respectfully and tries to make a positive difference. Brother Earth is Brother’s attitude and commitment to play a part in building a society with sustainable development. Help the environment now by giving a click at http://www.brotherearth.com. Brother will contribute to a variety of global environmental protection activities on your behalf. The number of clicks each project receives will determine proportionately how the funds will be allocated. This article was published in partnership with Brother.