Huawei has launched its flagship Mate 20 Pro in South Africa. The Mate 20 Pro is the first device to be powered by Huawei’s 7nm Kirin 980 chipset which it says will offer improved performance and a smooth user experience. The device also features a unique Leica triple-camera system arranged in a square at the back – including a 40MP wide angle main camera, a 20MP ultra-wide-angle camera, and an 8MP telephoto camera. Huawei said that the Mate 20 Pro will also boast its new Huawei SuperCharge and Wireless Quick Charge technology – alongside a powerful battery. It claims that SuperCharge gives the phone 70% charge in 30 minutes, noting that Huawei’s Wireless 15W Quick Charge is the industry’s fastest wireless charging solution.   Additional features include: Wireless Reverse Charge, which enables your phone to work as a power bank for selected electronic devices supporting wireless charging. The HiTouch function recognises objects in photos from your gallery, in your messages, or on a webpage, so that you can purchase them online. HiVision acts as your own personal tour guide; for example by pointing your smartphone camera at certain landmarks and works of art from around the world, their descriptions and backgrounds will pop up. “The Huawei Mate 20 series offers consumers a compelling combination of powerful artificial intelligence (AI), flagship performance, longer battery life, advanced security, a greater videography and photography experience, and more—all wrapped in a sophisticated design,” said Akhram Mohamed, CTO at Huawei Consumer Business Group South Africa. “It is the ultimate device made for those who will not settle for anything less than perfection.” Availability and pricing The recommended retail price for the Huawei Mate 20 Pro is R18,999. It will be available to pre-order at www.huaweipromo.co.za from 24 October to 31 October. The Huawei Mate 20 Pro will also be available on contract at the following providers: Vodacom: R799 PM x 24
MTN: R799 PM x 24
Telkom: R699 PM x 24
Cell C: R1,399 PM x 24 Read: Huawei Mate 20 Pro – the king of 2018?