Seedstars World, a seed-stage startup competition for emerging markets and fast-growing startup scenes, has announced 10 startups from Johannesburg to compete for a chance to represent the country at the Seedstars Africa Regional Summit. Seedstars connects stakeholders, builds companies from scratch with public and private partners and invests in high-growth startups within these ecosystems. The 10 best startups chosen will now pitch at an event on November 2. Besides representing South Africa at the Seedstars Regional Summit, the winner of the local finals will win an all-inclusive trip to Switzerland, to compete for the title of Seedstars Global Winner and up to $1 million in equity investments. South Africa was previously represented by EMG Technologies, a mobile and web-based medicines and treatment platform for medical professionals. Earlier this month, Seedstars World selected the winner of its Cape Town leg. The top startups to advance to the finals are: Busymed: links local pharmacies in one place for consumers to conveniently search, find and buy medicine (prescription & non-prescription) and have it delivered where ever they are.
Franc Group: is a self-insurance platform that offers customers the opportunity to grow their wealth and manage their personal risk.
Frugily: a retail tech startup that aims to assist shoppers to spend their money smarter by keeping track of their basket size in relation to their budget in grocery stores, create shopping lists and view shopping history across different retail chains.
Kenai: is a visitor and worker management solution that uses facial recognition to facilitate the fastest and most secure sign-in possible.
Maxicash: a financial support ecosystem built around remittance and payments for the African Diaspora to support their families financially.
Necta: ONE app, unlimited events. Necta is an open platform for exhibitors at any event (expo, market, conference) to generate leads in an automated way.
Prospa: a mobile savings wallet for the 10 million low-income earning South Africans.
Sendeddy Technologies: an on-demand delivery platform that drives down the costs of moving anything from an envelope to large machinery and equipment.
Snapslip: “Snapslip is a digital receipting and analytics application, that eradicates paper receipts by sending these receipts digitally to a customers profile within the application.
Uthini: a language learning platform that connects busy professionals who need to learn a language to people who can speak it using a structured learning path and chatbot technology. The event is powered by PayFast and further support is provided by HYBR the local ambassador. Read: 10 South African startups to watch – including an app that helps you find cool things to do in your area