UK hospitality group Whitbread has unveiled a new ‘no-frills’ hotel concept called ZIP by Premier Inn, which will open in early 2019. The flexible rooms can be made up as a single bed, twin single beds or pushed together to make a double, and cover and incredibly limited amount of space – at around 8.5 square metres. As well as a TV, there’s a small bathroom with a power shower, body wash and a towel, plus handy overhead storage and hangers. Whitbread said it conducted extensive research that revealed guests were willing to forego traditional expectations – such as large rooms and super-central locations – in favour of a lower price. ZIP by Premier Inn hotels will be located on the outskirts of major towns and cities and will feature small, modern rooms with prices from £19 (R350). The rooms are billed as ‘basics done brilliantly’ and are around less than half the size of a standard Premier Inn room (8.5 sqm). The rooms are compact; however, the clever design by PriestmanGoode – the design consultancy behind First Class Cabins for airlines including Air France, Lufthansa and SWISS – means that the space has been packed with useful features such as lightboxes, flexible bed formats & en-suite shower rooms. “The vibrant new brand was developed in partnership with global brand consultancy, Wolff Olins while design consultancy JCS Design developed the interior spaces,” it said. All standard ZIP rooms include: Twin single beds with Hypnos mattresses which can be pushed together to create a double bed;
Private bathroom with power shower;
Premier Inn Free Wi-Fi;
24-inch television;
Air conditioning. Optional paid-for extras include: Hot or cold breakfast for £3.95 per person;
Rooms are cleaned between guests’ stays. For guests’ staying for more than one night the room is not cleaned daily, but additional room cleaning can be purchased for £5 per day;
Fast Wi-Fi at £5 for 24 hours.  Read: This Sandton workspace is a mixture of a five-star hotel and the best airport lounges – here’s how much it costs