The biggest single sale day on the SA calendar, Black Friday, is almost here with retailers gearing up to offer exciting deals both in store and online from midnight on Thursday, 22 November until midnight on Cyber Monday, 26 November. In the lead up to the sales ‘day’, retail group TFG has announced the biggest deals taking place across its online stores. The group said that it is making it easier for customers to find great deals across all its brands online, giving access to 17 of TFG’s retail brands – including Donna, Exact, Foschini, @home, Markham, Sportscene, The FIX, and Totalsports – via a single URL of the new online marketplace. “Customers will be able to see the best of all the offers, visit the individual sites and also access exclusive promotions from TFG’s affiliate providers like Reader’s Warehouse, Hamley’s Toys, Pylones and SA Florist,” it said. Here is a roundup of the best Black Friday and Cyber Monday deals from TFG: myTFGworld.com has exclusive 20% discount deals on box sets of children’s books from Reader’s Warehouse, and 20% off flowers and bouquets from SA Florist. Sneakersheads can grab Reebok Classic x Montana Cans and Adidas Originals NMD sneakers from Archive in-store and online. Body positivity brand, Donna has a R159 sale on selected shoes, tops, jewellery and underwear from 21 November to 27 November. There will also be a 50% off online sale on Playtex and Triumph underwear on Cyber Monday. Duesouth will have deals on women’s dresses and men’s tees as well as a week-long Black Dot discounts on technology, gifts and performance equipment. Duesouth Escapes is offering 50% off selected luggage in-store and online over the Black Friday weekend. Family fashion brand Exact is offering “buy one get one free” on selected items for Black Friday, with additional deals to be announced for Cyber Monday. Fabiani will offer an extra 50% off all men’s and women’s sale goods, 30% off its “most wanted” menswear items, discounts on selected men’s suits and accessories and women’s polo tops. It will also offer 30% off selected G-Star RAW items on Cyber Monday. Foschini fashion is offering 3 for 2 on selected fashion in-store and online from Friday 23 November to Monday 26 November, and 50% off on selected accessories, shoes and bodywear. FoschiniforBeauty will have a wide range of deals available on cosmetics and fragrances. Tech store, hi, is offering 25% to 50% off selected smartphones in-store and online. @home has R200 off selected dining products, up to 25% off Baccarat Gourmet stone pot sets, up to R500 off selected kitchen products, up to R670 off selected bath and bed products, up to R2000 off selected home furnishings and up to R7000 off on selected furniture. Online exclusive offers from home.co.za include up to 50% off selected Nespresso appliances, up to R200 off selected Russel Hobbs appliances, up to R400 off selected dining chairs and up to R2000 off selected Dyson appliances. Markham has 50% off all sale goods for the Black Friday weekend Relay Jeans will have an extra 50% off all sale goods for the Black Friday weekend. Tween fashion store, Soda Bloc is offering a 3 for 2 sale on selected fashion in-store and online from 23 November to 26 November. Among the offers from Sportscene are Nike Blazer sneakers at R699,95 and Redbat straight leg denim jeans at R299,95 in-store and online. It’s “buy one get one free” on denim and tees from TheFIX with surprise deals to be announced on Cyber Monday. Totalsports will also have deals across the whole Black Friday weekend and Cyber Monday. Read: 5 things you can expect from Black Friday 2018 in South Africa