Edcon has now announced that it will be filling part of the gap left by Boardmans with its Edgars Home offering. Edgars Home will offer a number of private and third-party brands (including brands like Tefal, Jamie Oliver, and Noritake), and primarily focus on kitchen, living room and bedroom products. Edcon said that this new store concept will be rolled-out with a refreshed look and feel in the Edgars network as both stand-alone and shop-in-shop formats. “The first Edgars Home stores will launch on the 26 October,” it said. “By early November there will be seven new format stores launched in Sandton City Shopping Centre, Menlyn Park Shopping Centre, Clearwater Mall, Canal Walk Shopping Centre, East Rand Mall, Eastgate Shopping Centre, and La Lucia Mall, where the first ever Edgars Home new concept store will be opening on the 9 November 2018.” In July, Edcon Holdings announced that it will be closing a number of chains as part of its latest recovery plan. The move is the brainchild of new CEO Grant Pattison, who replaced Bernie Brookes at the helm of South Africa’s biggest non-food retailer in February. Under Pattison’s strategy, Edcon will reduce its 1,300-store footprint and cut floor space by 17% over five years to boost profitability. The retailer will focus its attention primarily on Edgars – which already sells most of the ranges available in the stores that will close. As part of the plan, Edcon said that it would retain discount clothing specialist Jet and its CNA chain of stationery stores – though the group’s homeware chain Boardmans got the chop. Strategy shift Edgars CE, Mike Elliott, said that one of the brand’s strategic imperatives is to re-establish Edgars as the anchor of the mall, which entails driving customers to the Edgars department store in the mall as well as building the Edgars brand. With Home already established as one of its three pillars of the broader business, Edgars is uniquely positioned in the South African Fashion, Beauty and Home market as a true department store, he said. “To further entrench that department store offering, Edgars Home now offers enhanced visual merchandising, revised layout, positioning, and fixtures that will create a more dominant destination for the category in line with the Edgars strategy,” said Elliott. “The revitalised in-store experience will also centre on elevating store windows with a focus on displaying private brands, and enrich story-telling with coordinated looks. “With the Edgars brand enhancing its offerings in Fashion, Home and Beauty, all stores are currently receiving the extended product offering. Continuous evaluation of its store portfolio will ensure the roll-out of the new in-store design into its store network over time as dictated by customer demand. ” He added that Edgars is also in the process of a new look and logo facelift, which would complement the new store layouts and the roll-out of its next-generation stores. Read: Boardmans to go, but CNA will stay – here are the brands and stores affected by Edcon’s new recovery plan