The Top Employers Institute has published the ranking of the top employers in South Africa for 2019. The annual international research undertaken by the Top Employers Institute recognises employers that provide excellent employee conditions, nurture and develop talent throughout all levels of the organisation, and which strive to continuously optimise employment practices. The companies are then evaluated across nine key areas: talent strategy, workforce planning, on-boarding, learning & development, performance management, leadership development, career & succession management, compensation & benefits, and culture. It must be noted that the Top Employers certification is by application. For the 2018/19 list, 99 companies were given South African certification. This is down from the 108 companies in 2017/18. In its 2016/17 certification process, 86 South African companies were given the award, up from 77 in 2015/16. The overall top company in the country in 2019 is Nestlé South Africa, followed by Accenture, Microsoft, EY South Africa and Unilever rounding out the top 5. The table below shows the top 10.  By industry, Vodacom was found to be the top employer in the telecoms sector, with Hollard ranked as the best employer in the finance services and insurance sectors. Clicks rules the retail industry, while Volkswagen ranked as the top employer in the automotive sector. The table below outlines the industry leaders, according to the Top Employers Institute.  According to the Top Employers survey, the companies indicated a fairly stable operational condition, despite the economic downturn and other stress factors. They indicated that: Revenue growth is stable (21%), slightly improved (22%) or strongly improved (38%).
Market share is stable, (28%) slightly improved (30%) or strongly improved (23%).
Profitability is stable (21%), slightly improved (26%), or strongly improved (31%).
Customer satisfaction is stable (30%), slightly improved (19%) or strongly improved (34%). Top Employer Institute country manager for Africa, Billy Elliott, said that the top companies in Africa (covering 195 companies across 31 African countries), employ over 541,000 employees, noting that workforces are evolving and becoming more inclusive. The group’s CEO, David link said that the certification represents organisations that demonstrate exceptional employee conditions, and encourages the development of these practices by putting people first. Read: South Africa’s best companies for customer experience