Statistics portal, Statista, recently published data indicating that there are around 152,000 Netflix subscribers in South Africa. This follows comments made by DStv parent MultiChoice, which estimated that Netflix has grown to between 300,000 and 400,000 subscribers in the country. It must be pointed out that the streaming service enables allows up to five viewing profiles on same account. Netflix told BusinessTech that it does not release subscriber numbers, but said that it is ‘very happy’ with the interest from members (local) since launch, in January 2016. “The way Netflix measures success is by the joy we bring our members all over the world by connecting them with great stories and artists, and our ability to grow and retain subscribers is a reflection of that,” it said. “Our plan for 2019 is bringing world’s best stories to our ZA fans and continuing our steady growth.” Netflix did note that it has seen an increase in sign-ups when certain marquee shows are launched and that certain shows are bigger acquisition drivers in South Africa. It highlighted Stranger Things, Narcos and The Crown as some of the most popular shows among local users. According to a February 2018 report by Variety, Netflix is set to spend upwards of $8 billion on content in 2018, and will have in the neighbourhood of 700 original TV shows on the service worldwide this year. Citing CFO David Wells, this huge bucket of content is continuing to drive up Netflix’s subscriber base, with 700-range figure he cited including 80 non-English-language original productions from outside the US, such as psychological thriller ‘Dark’ from Germany and ‘Club de Cuervos’ from Mexico. Earnings Netflix is also looking to redeem itself on Tuesday after missing subscriber estimates in the previous quarter, reports Bloomberg. The streaming giant is one of the first major US companies to report third-quarter results. As always, the most important gauge of Netflix’s performance is subscriber growth. Wall Street expects Netflix to have added about 5.1 million subscribers in the third quarter, based on the average of seven estimates compiled by Bloomberg News. That’s 673,000 in the US and 4.42 million internationally. For the fourth quarter, analysts are anticipating 1.64 million net subscriber additions in the US and 5.54 million internationally, based on five estimates. Read: Netflix accounts for as much as 15% of the total downstream traffic on the internet