The Times Higher Education World University Rankings has published its latest subject rankings, showing which South African universities come out tops for those looking to study business and law. The subject rankings are based on the same range of 13 performance indicators used in the overall World University Rankings 2019, but the methodology is recalibrated for each subject to suit the individual fields. The group covers 11 different subject fields overall, but published rankings over time, between October and November 2018. This week, the subject rankings for business and economics, education, social studies and law were released – this is how South African universities performed. Business and Economics Seven South African universities were ranked among the top 585 universities in business and economics, which highlights the universities that are leading across business and management, accounting and finance, and economics and econometrics subjects. The University of Cape Town ranks at the top of the local list, placing in the top 200, followed by the University of Pretoria, Wits and UJ. Law Five South African universities made the list of the top 187 universities in law, led by the University of Pretoria. Social Sciences Nine South African universities were ranked among the top 666 universities in social sciences – with the University of Cape Town making it into the top 100. Wits University also ranked quite highly, making it into the top 150. This ranking highlights the universities that are leading across sociology, geography, politics and international studies, and communication and media studies subjects. Since 2018, education, law and psychology subjects have not been included in the social sciences table, but make up three separate rankings (to be published later). Education Eight South African universities were ranked among the top 428 universities in education, led by the University of Cape Town, which was also ranked within the top 100 overall. This ranking highlights the universities that are leading across education, teacher training and academic studies in education subjects. Read: South Africa’s 13 best universities revealed