FNB on Wednesday launched a new functionality on its banking app that enables customers to securely list and sell their homes privately to buyers who most likely qualify for a home loan – while claiming a cost saving associated with the process. “With over 8 million properties registered in the deeds office, we see a significant opportunity to become a game-changer in the property industry. The bank continues to innovate by delivering customer-centric integrated financial services underpinned by digitisation. “Substantial investment has been made to ensure that our digital platforms are not only helpful but also built to enhance the overall customer experience; ultimately helping consumers to help themselves,” said Raj Makanjee, FNB Retail CEO. Nav chief imagineer (CEO), Jolandé Duvenage, said: “Through this solution, our sellers and buyers can engage, arrange to view a listed property and negotiate the price, via Secure Chat on the FNB Banking App. Sellers and buyers and sellers also can disclose personal contact information only when they are comfortable to do so.” FNB’s Nav Home service helps customers to search for houses, get pre-selected for finance and uncover associated costs with calculators. To date, Nav Home has over 1 million unique visitors and has paid out R4.7 billion worth of home loans since inception,” FNB said. Duvenage unpacked the benefits for selling and buying a house privately via nav» Home: Sellers Access thousands of buyers most likely to qualify for a Home Loan;
Conveniently calculate your savings upfront;
A quick and convenient 6-step listing process;
List for a fair price using an instant free value estimate for your property and view similar and current listings in your area;
Manage and edit your own listing at any stage;
Monitor number of views & likes (provides valuable customer insights);
Filter buyers on the likelihood to qualify for a Home Loan. Buyers Engage in a trusted environment;
View photo galleries of properties;
Request a quick and easy pre-approval and Home Loan application;
Access other Nav Home tools like calculators, instant free value estimates, area and property reports;
Access a standard Offer to Purchase document;
Get 50% back in eBucks on the first Home Loan repayment and get up to 50% off bond registration fees with a selected panel of attorneys. Read: FNB launches new Nav Money tool