Mercedes-Benz has announced pricing for its first V6 double-cab bakkie in South Africa – the X350d 4MATIC. The bakkie will be available in two design and equipment lines  – ‘progressive’ and ‘power’. The X-Class Progressive is aimed at people seeking a rugged double cab with extra styling and comfort functions, while also being a comfortable yet prestigious vehicle for private or dual use, Mercedes-Benz said. In comparison, the X-Class Power will act as the high-end line. It is aimed at customers for whom styling, performance and comfort are paramount. As a lifestyle vehicle beyond the mainstream, it is suitable for urban environments as well as for sports and leisure activities off the beaten track. Its design and high level of equipment reflect an independent and individualistic lifestyle. “The much-anticipated Mercedes-Benz X-Class is well-positioned to elevate the South African double cab segment even further,” said Nadia Trimmel, head of Mercedes-Benz Vans Southern Africa. “It will do this not only by offering a dynamic design paired with luxurious interior and unparalleled performance, but also by being perfectly-priced. “We are confident that the new ultimateV6 X-Class range-topper presents a next to none offering – combining modern design, safety, sophistication and a supreme level of comfort. The V6 reflects luxury and performance, best characterised by quality engineering and of course power like no other,” added Trimmel.  Pricing The prices detailed are the manufacturer’s recommended retail prices, and exclude optional extras and any dealer associated costs, such as registration, delivery, etc. The V6 is available with a full range of accessories, which are excluded from the recommended retail prices above. X350d (190 kW) Progressive – R904,188 (including C02 tax and VAT)
X350d (190 kW) Power – R973,188 (including C02 tax and VAT) Mercedes-Benz confirmed that the X-Class V6 350d version is now now available to order. To configure your Mercedes-Benz X-Class and for more information on the vehicle and authorised selling outlets, visit www.x-class.co.za. Read: South African motorists could get petrol price relief in November: economist