The Economic Freedom Fighters (EFF) announced its intention to table three private member bills in parliament this week. Gazetted on Wednesday and Thursday (3 and 4 October), the bills plan to tackle everything from Liquor to the insourcing of workers, and tax avoidance. BusinessTech broke down the new bills and how they may impact South African individuals and businesses below. The Liquor Amendment Bill The Liquor Amendment Bill seeks to place a blanket ban on alcohol advertising, and introduce new warning labels. The prevalence of alcohol-induced dangers to society is flourishing, and many households are suffering as a result of alcohol abuse, the EFF said in an explanatory statement. “Young people in particular, are being socialised into accepting alcohol use and abuse as an inalienable part of their existence. The normalisation of alcohol use will have long lasting deleterious effects on society. “While not seeking to be a nanny state, there should be deliberate attempts by the state to counter the normalisation of alcohol usage,” it states. According to the statement, the main of the objectives of the bill are: Amend section 9 of the Liquor Act, so as to ban the advertising of alcohol and liquor from all forms of media, including TV, radio, print and online newspapers;
Ban the advertising of alcohol and liquor from billboards and pamphlets; and
Include a mandatory provision that all alcohol and liquor products must include warnings about the dangers of alcohol and liquor use. The Insourcing Bill The South African government in all spheres, including State Owned Entities (SOE’s) provides services to citizens, but to do so contracts third parties who provide these services and who bring their own employees to deliver these services. According to the EFF,  all these services will be required on a recurring basis, and there will continue to be a need for government to provide them for an indefinite period of time. In an effort to clamp down on issues with this system, the Insourcing Bill will require all government departments and State-Owned Entities (SOE)’s at national, provincial and local levels to insource all services that they provide on a recurring basis. This will result in a prohibition on employing anyone who provides services for government or SOE’s on a recurring basis, through a third party, it states. The Anti-Avoidance of Tax Bill The EFF”s Anti-Avoidance of Tax Bill cites concerns with powerful ‘Transnational Corporations’ (TNCs) and how they are structured to avoid tax. “TNCs are operating within, and themselves creating, a ‘financialised’ and globalised capitalism where profits can be shifted around the world in trade between fellow companies or so-called inter-related parties,” the EFF states in its explanatory memorandum. “Current economic policy and legislation in South Africa has allowed major South African corporations to list abroad, and has also allowed for the relaxation of capital controls. “As a consequence, TNC’s are continuously planning and engaging in aggressive tax avoidance that is costing the country billions of rands in tax revenue.” According to the statement, the main of the objectives of the bill are: Improve the legal tools SARS has available, by legally compelling SARS to intervene against aggressive tax avoidance schemes;
Legislate clear definitions and eliminate all legal loop hope holes and grey areas, as to what constitutes tax avoidance, and tax avoidance schemes;
Introduce strong penalty regimes for companies that participate in aggressive tax avoidance schemes; and
Repeal sections 80A to 80L of the Income Tax Act, 1962 (Act No. 58 of 1962) and amend sections 80M to 80T of that Act, where necessary. Read: These are South Africa’s 3 biggest economic constraints