Consumer Reports has published its reliability rankings for 2018, with the data based on more than a half million of its members reviewing their own vehicles. Lexus and Toyota topped the rankings as they have for six years in a row, although the two traded places in 2018 as Asia’s brand dominance persisted. Seven of the top 10 brands in this year’s reliability rankings are from Japan and South Korea, including Subaru, Kia, Infiniti, and Hyundai. Three European brands, Audi, BMW, and Mini, rounded out the top 10. Audi and BMW both declined from last year. Three other brands, Porsche, Volkswagen, and Mercedes-Benz, finished mid-pack. The report noted that every US automaker landed in the bottom-half of the rankings, which covers 29 brands this year – two more than 2017. Ford ranked the highest at 18, down three spots from the previous year. Tesla fell six spots from last year, ranking third-worst (27 out of 29). “While the Tesla Model S appears very similar physically to the car that launched six years ago, Tesla has made many significant mechanical and software changes over the past few years. Just as we’ve seen with many other manufacturers, major changes and updates can cause reliability to slide. It can take a year or two for carmakers to work out the kinks with new technology,” said Jake Fisher, director of Auto Testing at CR. “Making air suspension and AWD standard in the 2017 model has added more complexity and more things that could potentially falter.” Volvo dropped six spots from last year as it rapidly brings a number of new models to market. It’s now in last-place among the 29 brands in the survey due in large part to an infotainment system that’s common to a number of different models including the XC60 and XC90 and the S90. For the XC60, owners also reported problems with the climate system and interior cabin rattles. Other European automakers also lost ground. Audi tumbled three spots to seven on the list. BMW fell three spots to eight, followed by Mini at number nine. Mercedes-Benz declined three spots to number 17. The C-Class coupe and sedan improves to “average,” but the GLC and E-Class are “below-average,” the report said. Porsche bucked the trend in this group, rising two places to number 11. Mazda jumped nine spots in the rankings to third overall, making it the year’s biggest gainer, as the automaker worked out the problems that plagued the CX-9 and MX-5 Miata roadster. Subaru continued its recent march up the chart, rising two places to fourth overall. The Infiniti brand also rebounded slightly, with the Q50 getting an “average” score and the QX60 improving to “above average.” Nissan similarly tumbled a few slots, even with both the Maxima and the redesigned Leaf rating above average. Honda turned in mixed results, landing at 15, which is six spots lower from the year prior. The brand’s reliability is bogged down by some of its new and redesigned models, the report said, with the CR-V and new Accord dropping to “average.” Kia dropped two spots but remained in the top-10 as its all-new Stinger hatchback rated “average” for reliability, as was the Sportage.  Read: These are the 5 most reliable car brands in South Africa