In celebration of the two year anniversary of Uber Eats in South Africa, the startup has released new statistics on what locals are ordering. According to the company, local residents now have access to more than 2,000 restaurants – with over 50,000 meal options currently available through the app. This means that in a more popular geographical area such as Sandton, consumers can choose from more than 250 restaurants, it said. Uber Eats is also providing local residents with a flexible way to earn some extra income, whether to bridge gaps in work or top up their existing income. During this year alone, Uber Eats has created more than 1,500 flexible economic opportunities for delivery-partners, it said. In addition, the company said that it plans to further localise their service offering through new features such as cash payments on delivery, which meets the specific needs of local residents and businesses. This pilot cash payment option will be rolled out in the coming months, it said. “Our obsession with customer service and technology has helped us thrive in a highly competitive market, and has helped us become the number one app in the market over the last two years,” said Ailyssa Pretorius, GM for Uber Eats South Africa. “It has been an exciting two-years, demand from South African residents and businesses has been amazing, and our delivery-partners continue thrive. All this has made it possible for us to expand to five cities during this period.” According to Uber Eats, the most popular meals (in terms of cities) are as follows: Johannesburg – Streetwise 2 from KFC
Cape Town – Roasted Chilli Paste and Cashew Nut Noodles from Simply Asia
Durban – Strips and Tjips from Afros Fuel prices Speaking to BusinessTech, Uber confirmed that both its food delivery and lifting services will not see price increases due to the record-high fuel price. “For Uber ride fares, currently prices will not be adjusted,” it said. “Uber constantly monitor fares, examines consumer price sensitivities and driver-partner economics in each city to ensure that fares are correctly priced so that riders continue to take trips and drivers have access to more fare paying passengers. “Uber uses a pricing model which is tried and tested in 600+ cities across the world.” It added in July this year, the minimum fare for your uberX rides throughout South Africa was increased from R20 to R25. Read: Uber to pay settlement over data breach